Alack, alack, what blood is this which stains



Chorus.



Can vengeance be pursu'd further than death?



And bid me stand aloof, and so I did.



A pair of star-cross'd lovers take their life;







And the continuance of their parents' rage,



And here is come to do some villanous shame







 

ACT I.





 



 



And in despite I'll cram thee with more food.













Bal. [aside] For all this same, I'll hide me hereabout.









Bal. I will be gone, sir, and not trouble you.



And threat'ned me with death, going in the vault,

















And strew this hungry churchyard with thy limbs.

And then in post he came from Mantua



By heaven, I will tear thee joint by joint



 



 

But if thou, jealous, dost return to pry





A precious ring- a ring that I must use



But chiefly to take thence from her dead finger





Abram. Do you bite your thumb at us, sir?



Abram. Do you bite your thumb at us, sir?



And do not interrupt me in my course.



Bal. I brought my master news of Juliet's death;



Abram. Quarrel, sir? No, sir.



Abram. No better.









Abr. You lie.





 

 

 

Ben. Part, fools! [Beats down their swords.]



 



 





Ben. I do but keep the peace. Put up thy sword,

 



As I hate hell, all Montagues, and thee.



Be sacrific'd, some hour before his time,

 





 

 Citizens. Clubs, bills, and partisans! Strike! beat them down!



 



 

Cap. What noise is this? Give me my long sword, ho!



Cap. My sword, I say! Old Montague is come

And flourishes his blade in spite of me.

 



 



But not another sin upon my head

 



 















And hear the sentence of your moved prince.

All this I know; and to the marriage

By thee, old Capulet, and Montague,

By urging me to fury. O, be gone!

And made Verona's ancient citizens

Cast by their grave beseeming ornaments



Cank'red with peace, to part your cank'red hate.



But, as it seems, did violence on herself.





And, Montague, come you this afternoon,

And she, too desperate, would not go with me,





 



 





Ben. Here were the servants of your adversary

And yours, close fighting ere I did approach.



But then a noise did scare me from the tomb,



As signal that thou hear'st something approach.

And bear this work of heaven with patience;



Came more and more, and fought on part and part,



But thou shalt hear it. Whistle then to me,



Ben. Madam, an hour before the worshipp'd sun

(Being loose, unfirm, with digging up of graves)

A troubled mind drave me to walk abroad;









And stole into the covert of the wood.





Being one too many by my weary self-



And gladly shunn'd who gladly fled from me.



But when I came, some minute ere the time

Adding to clouds more clouds with his deep sighs;

But all so soon as the all-cheering sun

By heaven, I love thee better than myself,



Away from light steals home my heavy son

And private in his chamber pens himself,



And makes himself an artificial night.

Black and portentous must this humour prove



Ben. My noble uncle, do you know the cause?



Ben. Have you importun'd him by any means?

 

But he, his own affections' counsellor,



But to himself so secret and so close,



As is the bud bit with an envious worm

 







 



 

Ben. See, where he comes. So please you step aside,

 





 



 

Ben. Good morrow, cousin.



Ben. But new struck nine.

And keep her at my cell till Romeo come-

Came I to take her from her kindred's vault;

Ben. It was. What sadness lengthens Romeo's hours?



Ben. In love?

But I will write again to Mantua,

Ben. Of love?



Ben. Alas that love, so gentle in his view,









At the prefixed hour of her waking



















Ben. No, coz, I rather weep.



Ben. At thy good heart's oppression.













Being purg'd, a fire sparkling in lovers' eyes;

Being vex'd, a sea nourish'd with lovers' tears.

But he which bore my letter, Friar John,

A choking gall, and a preserving sweet.



Ben. Soft! I will go along.

An if you leave me so, you do me wrong.





Ben. Tell me in sadness, who is that you love?



Ben. Groan? Why, no;

But sadly tell me who.



Ah, word ill urg'd to one that is so ill!



Ben. I aim'd so near when I suppos'd you lov'd.

And finding him, the searchers of the town,

Ben. A right fair mark, fair coz, is soonest hit.



Being the time the potion's force should cease.

And, in strong proof of chastity well arm'd,









A madman's mercy bid thee run away.



Ben. Then she hath sworn that she will still live chaste?





 







 

Ben. Be rul'd by me: forget to think of her.



Ben. By giving liberty unto thine eyes.



 





Being black puts us in mind they hide the fair.



As I intended, for it wrought on her





A sleeping potion, which so took effect

 

Ben. I'll pay that doctrine, or else die in debt. 



 



 A Street.

 



 

Cap. But Montague is bound as well as I,



 



And pity 'tis you liv'd at odds so long.

But now, my lord, what say you to my suit?

Cap. But saying o'er what I have said before:





Come, cordial and not poison, go with me





Cap. And too soon marr'd are those so early made.





But woo her, gentle Paris, get her heart;



An she agree, within her scope of choice











At my poor house look to behold this night

And drink it off, and if you had the strength





Apoth. Put this in any liquid thing you will

Among fresh female buds shall you this night



And like her most whose merit most shall be;





Come, go with me. [To the SERVANT, giving back a paper]

Apoth. My poverty but not my will consents.

And with wild looks bid me devise some mean





 

And apprehend thee for a felon here.

 





Betroth'd and would have married her perforce







 



 

Ben. Tut, man, one fire burns out another's burning;







Banish'd the new-made bridegroom from this city;

And the rank poison of the old will die.



Ben. For what, I pray thee?

And fearest to die? Famine is in thy cheeks,

Ben. Why, Romeo, art thou mad?









Apoth. Such mortal drugs I have; but Mantua's law







As violently as hasty powder fir'd



And that the trunk may be discharg'd of breath







As will disperse itself through all the veins



A dram of poison, such soon-speeding gear







A fair assembly. Whither should they come?

Apoth. Who calls so loud?



 





 



Capulet; and if you be not of the house of Montagues, I pray come



Ben. At this same ancient feast of Capulet's

Being holiday, the beggar's shop is shut. What, ho! apothecary!

And she, there dead, that Romeo's faithful wife.



Compare her face with some that I shall show,

And I will make thee think thy swan a crow.

As I remember, this should be the house.



And these, who, often drown'd, could never die,



And this same needy man must sell it me.



Ben. Tut! you saw her fair, none else being by,



But in that crystal scales let there be weigh'd





And she shall scant show well that now seems best.



But to rejoice in splendour of my own.



 

'An if a man did need a poison now

 A room in CAPULET'S house.

 



 









 

A beggarly account of empty boxes,

 





An alligator stuff'd, and other skins



And in his needy shop a tortoise hung,











And hereabouts 'a dwells, which late I noted

And yet, to my teen be it spoken, I have but four-









Come Lammas Eve at night shall she be fourteen.











And hire those horses. I'll be with thee straight.

And she was wean'd (I never shall forget it),





Bal. No, my good lord.









And here I stand, both to impeach and purge





And since that time it is eleven years,







And then my husband (God be with his soul!

'A was a merry man) took up the child.

Bal. I do beseech you, sir, have patience.









And hire posthorses. I will hence to-night.



And, pretty fool, it stinted, and said 'Ay.'





Bring forth the parties of suspicion.

And yet, I warrant, it bad upon it brow

A bump as big as a young cock'rel's stone;

A perilous knock; and it cried bitterly.



And let mischance be slave to patience.







And lead you even to death. Meantime forbear,

An I might live to see thee married once, I have my wish.

And presently took post to tell it you.





And her immortal part with angels lives.





Bal. Then she is well, and nothing can be ill.



Are made already mothers. By my count,

 



And then will I be general of your woes



As all the world- why he's a man of wax.











And find delight writ there with beauty's pen;



And see how one another lends content;

And what obscur'd in this fair volume lies

 

And know their spring, their head, their true descent;











 

By having him making yourself no less.







But no more deep will I endart mine eye



 

Ah me! how sweet is love itself possess'd,

 







And breath'd such life with kisses in my lips









 

And all this day an unaccustom'd spirit

 A street.

 





 





Ben. The date is out of such prolixity.



Bearing a Tartar's painted bow of lath,



 

After the prompter, for our entrance;

But, let them measure us by what they will,





Being but heavy, I will bear the light.

 









And soar with them above a common bound.

ACT V.



 

















A visor for a visor! What care I





Ben. Come, knock and enter; and no sooner in

But every man betake him to his legs.



 





















 





But 'tis no wit to go.











And doleful dumps the mind oppress,











Athwart men's noses as they lie asleep;























And in this state she 'gallops night by night











Because their breaths with sweetmeats tainted are.



And then dreams he of smelling out a suit;

And sometime comes she with a tithe-pig's tail

And it missheathed in my daughter's bosom.





And then dreams he of cutting foreign throats,







And being thus frighted, swears a prayer or two

And sleeps again. This is that very Mab



And bakes the elflocks in foul sluttish, hairs,





Cap. O heavens! O wife, look how our daughter bleeds!

 











Begot of nothing but vain fantasy;



And more inconstant than the wind, who wooes

 

And, being anger'd, puffs away from thence,



Ben. This wind you talk of blows us from ourselves.













By some vile forfeit of untimely death.

But he that hath the steerage of my course

 

Ben. Strike, drum.



 



 A hall in CAPULET'S house

 



 





 

And Romeo dead; and Juliet, dead before,







Anthony, and Potpan!









Be brisk awhile, and the longer liver take all.



 

And go, Sir Paris. Every one prepare



 

Cap. Welcome, gentlemen! Ladies that have their toes



Ah ha, my mistresses! which of you all





And all things change them to the contrary.



A whispering tale in a fair lady's ear,



Cap. What should it be, that they so shriek abroad?

A hall, a hall! give room! and foot it, girls.





And quench the fire, the room is grown too hot.

Ah, sirrah, this unlook'd-for sport comes well.











Cap. What, man? 'Tis not so much, 'tis not so much!

 

Come Pentecost as quickly as it will,

Cap. All things that we ordained festival





Cap. Will you tell me that?











But she's best married that dies married young.





Beauty too rich for use, for earth too dear!



As yonder lady o'er her fellows shows.



And, touching hers, make blessed my rude hand.



Above the clouds, as high as heaven itself?





Come hither, cover'd with an antic face,

 

And weep ye now, seeing she is advanc'd



Cap. Why, how now, kinsman? Wherefore storm you so?



A villain, that is hither come in spite



Cap. Young Romeo is it?



Cap. Content thee, gentle coz, let him alone.

'A bears him like a portly gentleman,

And, to say truth, Verona brags of him

 



A grave? O, no, a lanthorn, slaught'red youth,





But heaven keeps his part in eternal life.

An ill-beseeming semblance for a feast.





Cap. He shall be endur'd.



Am I the master here, or you? Go to!

 





As he was coming from this churchyard side.

Cap. Go to, go to!







 

Be quiet, or- More light, more light!- For shame!





And all the better is it for the maid.







 



And with my child my joys are buried.









 



And palm to palm is holy palmers' kiss.





Cap. Despis'd, distressed, hated, martyr'd, kill'd!









By cruel cruel thee quite overthrown!







 









And a good lady, and a wise and virtuous.







And cruel Death hath catch'd it from my sight!



Ben. Away, be gone; the sport is at the best.

But one thing to rejoice and solace in,

Cap. Nay, gentlemen, prepare not to be gone;



 



But one, poor one, one poor and loving child,





Ah, sirrah, by my fay, it waxes late;



 



 



And doth it give me such a sight as this?





And leave him all. Life, living, all is Death's.















Cap. Ready to go, but never to return.

 





 





Come, let's away; the strangers all are gone.

 

 

ACT II.

 



 



 

Chorus. Now old desire doth in his deathbed lie,

And young affection gapes to be his heir;





Cap. Death, that hath ta'en her hence to make me wail,

Alike bewitched by the charm of looks;

But to his foe suppos'd he must complain,

And she steal love's sweet bait from fearful hooks.

Being held a foe, he may not have access

But the true ground of all these piteous woes

And she as much in love, her means much less



But passion lends them power, time means, to meet,





 





 



 







 



 

Ben. Romeo! my cousin Romeo! Romeo!



And, on my life, hath stol'n him home to bed.

Ben. He ran this way, and leapt this orchard wall.

Call, good Mercutio.

Cap. Ha! let me see her. Out alas! she's cold,



Appear thou in the likeness of a sigh;





Cap. For shame, bring Juliet forth; her lord is come.



 







 

By her high forehead and her scarlet lip,

By her fine foot, straight leg, and quivering thigh,

And the demesnes that there adjacent lie,



Ben. An if he hear thee, thou wilt anger him.







And Juliet bleeding, warm, and newly dead,







Ben. Come, he hath hid himself among these trees



Blind is his love and best befits the dark.





And wish his mistress were that kind of fruit

As maids call medlars when they laugh alone.



An open et cetera, thou a pop'rin pear!

 



Come, shall we go?

Ben. Go then, for 'tis in vain



 



 

 

 







But soft! What light through yonder window breaks?

Alas, alas! Help, help! My lady's dead!

Arise, fair sun, and kill the envious moon,





Be not her maid, since she is envious.



And none but fools do wear it. Cast it off.





Ay, let the County take you in your bed!











.



As daylight doth a lamp; her eyes in heaven



 













As glorious to this night, being o'er my head,

As is a winged messenger of heaven







And sails upon the bosom of the air.





 

And I'll no longer be a Capulet.











Belonging to a man. O, be some other name!

 

By any other name would smell as sweet.

 





And for that name, which is no part of thee,





Call me but love, and I'll be new baptiz'd;







 





Because it is an enemy to thee.

 





Art thou not Romeo, and a Montague?



A lightning before death. O, how may I



And the place death, considering who thou art,







And what love can do, that dares love attempt.





Cap. Mass, and well said! A merry whoreson, ha.



And I am proof against their enmity.

And never trouble Peter for the matter.



And but thou love me, let them find me here.





Call Peter; he will show thee where they are.





Cap. Make haste, make haste. [Exit 1 Servingman.]

As that vast shore wash'd with the farthest sea,









Cap. A jealous-hood, a jealous-hood!



 

And I will take thy word. Yet, if thou swear'st,







 



But I will watch you from such watching now.



And therefore thou mayst think my haviour light;

But trust me, gentleman, I'll prove more true





But that thou overheard'st, ere I was ware,

All night for lesser cause, and ne'er been sick.

And not impute this yielding to light love,





Cap. No, not a whit. What, I have watch'd ere now















And I'll believe thee.

Call this a lightning? O my love! my wife!



Cap. Come, stir, stir, stir! The second cock hath crow'd,





 

Cap. As rich shall Romeo's by his lady's lie-





Come to thy heart as that within my breast!

 







And yet I would it were to give again.

 



And yet I wish but for the thing I have.



 





CAPULET'S house.

Anon, good nurse! Sweet Montague, be true.





Being in night, all this is but a dream,

As that of true and faithful Juliet.

 







By one that I'll procure to come to thee,



And all my fortunes at thy foot I'll lay

And follow thee my lord throughout the world.













As with a club dash out my desp'rate brains?



And, in this rage, with some great kinsman's bone



And pluck the mangled Tybalt from his shroud.,

But love from love, towards school with heavy looks. [Retiring.]



And madly play with my forefathers' joints,



Bondage is hoarse and may not speak aloud;



And make her airy tongue more hoarse than mine







And shrieks like mandrakes torn out of the earth,





Alack, alack, is it not like that I,



At some hours in the night spirits resort-













As in a vault, an ancient receptacle





And yet no farther than a wanton's bird,





And with a silk thread plucks it back again,







Can I demand.

And there die strangled ere my Romeo comes?



 



 







Come to redeem me? There's a fearful point!



 





 



 



Check'ring the Eastern clouds with streaks of light;

And flecked darkness like a drunkard reels



Because he married me before to Romeo?

Cap. O brother Montague, give me thy hand.









And from her womb children of divers kind

And I, for winking at you, discords too,











But to the earth some special good doth give;



And death's pale flag is not advanced there.



And vice sometime's by action dignified.





Come, vial.

Being tasted, slays all senses with the heart.





And where the worser is predominant,



 



 











Care keeps his watch in every old man's eye,

And where care lodges sleep will never lie;

But where unbruised youth with unstuff'd brain



Came to this vault to die, and lie with Juliet.



 





 











And let the nurse this night sit up with you;



And here he writes that he did buy a poison





As are behooffull for our state to-morrow.







As mine on hers, so hers is set on mine,

And all combin'd, save what thou must combine

By holy marriage. When, and where, and how



 







 













And then I ran away to call the Watch.





 



And art thou chang'd? Pronounce this sentence then:

And by and by my master drew on him,





 









Anon comes one with light to ope the tomb;

 



But come, young waverer, come go with me.





And bid me stand aloof, and so I did.



Against to-morrow. My heart is wondrous light,



 



A street.

 



 



Came he not home to-night?

Ben. Not to his father's. I spoke with his man.





Ben. Tybalt, the kinsman to old Capulet,





Ben. Romeo will answer it.



Ben. Nay, he will answer the letter's master, how he dares, being

And all things shall be well, I warrant thee, wife.





Cap. Tush, I will stir about,



Ben. Why, what is Tybalt?













And threat'ned me with death, going in the vault,

Ben. The what?









And then in post he came from Mantua



Bal. I brought my master news of Juliet's death;

 

 

 

Ben. Here comes Romeo! here comes Romeo!









Cap. Go, nurse, go with her. We'll to church tomorrow.





Be sacrific'd, some hour before his time,





As you think fit to furnish me tomorrow?









All our whole city is much bound to him.





Ay, marry, go, I say, and fetch him hither.









Cap. Why, I am glad on't. This is well. Stand up.





And gave him what becomed love I might,





All this I know; and to the marriage







Cap. Send for the County. Go tell him of this.







But, as it seems, did violence on herself.







And she, too desperate, would not go with me,



But then a noise did scare me from the tomb,



Ben. Stop there, stop there!

By holy Laurence to fall prostrate here

Ben. Thou wouldst else have made thy tale large.



And bear this work of heaven with patience;





 



 



Ben. Two, two! a shirt and a smock.



Cap. How now, my headstrong? Where have you been gadding?





 





 





A peevish self-will'd harlotry it is.



Cap. Well, be may chance to do some good on her.







And that the lean abhorred monster keeps







But when I came, some minute ere the time



Ben. She will endite him to some supper.

Cap. Go, begone. [Exit Servingman.]









An old hare hoar,

And an old hare hoar,



But a hare that is hoar





Cap. How canst thou try them so?







 



 







Came I to take her from her kindred's vault;

Cap. So many guests invite as here are writ.





At the prefixed hour of her waking



 









But he which bore my letter, Friar John,



Being the time the potion's force should cease.









 



CAPULET'S house.





As I intended, for it wrought on her

 



And there she shall at Friar Laurence' cell

Be shriv'd and married. Here is for thy pains.







And never from this palace of dim night



And bring thee cords made like a tackled stair,

A sleeping potion, which so took effect









Abate thy valour in the acting it.







And this shall free thee from this present shame,











And with wild looks bid me devise some mean









Betroth'd and would have married her perforce



And hither shall he come; and he and I









 



 CAPULET'S orchard.

 



 















And therefore hath the wind-swift Cupid wings.

And then awake as from a pleasant sleep.



And shake the yoke of inauspicious stars



And in this borrowed likeness of shrunk death



And his to me,

But old folks, many feign as they were dead-



 



 









Banish'd the new-made bridegroom from this city;



By playing it to me with so sour a face.





A cold and drowsy humour; for no pulse







And this distilled liquor drink thou off;







Arms, take your last embrace! and, lips, O you











And she, there dead, that Romeo's faithful wife.











A dateless bargain to engrossing death!



And I will do it without fear or doubt,

Beshrew your heart for sending me about









And hide me with a dead man in his shroud-









Come, bitter conduct; come, unsavoury guide!



Are you so hot? Marry come up, I trow.

















And here I stand, both to impeach and purge

And, if thou dar'st, I'll give thee remedy.







But you shall bear the burthen soon at night.



A thing like death to chide away this shame,



 





 



 



As that is desperate which we would prevent.















And in their triumph die, like fire and powder,

Be not so long to speak. I long to die



And in the taste confounds the appetite.



Bring forth the parties of suspicion.

 



 





A lover may bestride the gossamer

And let mischance be slave to patience.

And yet not fall; so light is vanity.





 



Be heap'd like mine, and that thy skill be more



And lead you even to death. Meantime forbear,







Brags of his substance, not of ornament.

And then will I be general of your woes

But my true love is grown to such excess







And know their spring, their head, their true descent;



 

ACT III.



A public place.

 

And ere this hand, by thee to Romeo's seal'd,

 

Ben. I pray thee, good Mercutio, let's retire.



And if we meet, we shall not scape a brawl,







Condemned villain, I do apprehend thee.

And with this knife I'll help it presently.

Ben. Am I like such a fellow?







Ben. And what to?



























Ben. An I were so apt to quarrel as thou art, any man should buy





 



 

Ben. By my head, here come the Capulets.

Come weep with me- past hope, past cure, past help!

 





 





 





 



Ben. We talk here in the public haunt of men.



And reason coldly of your grievances,







 



 



Are you at leisure, holy father, now,









And what I spake, I spake it to my face.



And it missheathed in my daughter's bosom.









But love thee better than thou canst devise



And so good Capulet, which name I tender

As dearly as mine own, be satisfied.



Alla stoccata carries it away. [He draws.]

Cap. O heavens! O wife, look how our daughter bleeds!















Being spoke behind your back, than to your face.









And Romeo dead; and Juliet, dead before,





 



 

A Follower. Away Tybalt.

 



 



A plague o' both your houses! I am sped.



Ben. What, art thou hurt?











 











 







And soundly too. Your houses!

 



 







Cap. What should it be, that they so shriek abroad?





And in my temper soft'ned valour's steel

 



 

Ben. O Romeo, Romeo, brave Mercutio's dead!

 



And in his wisdom hastes our marriage



 



 

Ben. Here comes the furious Tybalt back again.



Away to heaven respective lenity,

And fire-ey'd fury be my conduct now!







And therefore have I little talk'd of love;



 







Ben. Romeo, away, be gone!





And I am nothing slow to slack his haste.



Ben. Why dost thou stay?

 



 



 

Citizen. Which way ran he that kill'd Mercutio?

 

Ben. There lies that Tybalt.

Citizen. Up, sir, go with me.



 



 

 

Ben. O noble Prince. I can discover all



 









ACT IV.



 

Ben. Tybalt, here slain, whom Romeo's hand did stay.













 



And, with a martial scorn, with one hand beats

Cold death aside and with the other sends





Bal. Here's one, a friend, and one that knows you well.



And 'twixt them rushes; underneath whose arm

An envious thrust from Tybalt hit the life



But by-and-by comes back to Romeo,



And to't they go like lightning; for, ere I



And, as he fell, did Romeo turn and fly.

As he was coming from this churchyard side.



Affection makes him false, he speaks not true.



And all those twenty could but kill one life.























But I'll amerce you with so strong a fine

As living here and you no use of him.









Bear hence this body, and attend our will.



As Paris hath. Beshrew my very heart,

 



CAPULET'S orchard.

 



 



 

As Phaeton would whip you to the West

And bring in cloudy night immediately.









By their own beauties; or, if love be blind,





And learn me how to lose a winning match,







 

Come, night; come, Romeo; come, thou day in night;





Come, gentle night; come, loving, black-brow'd night;





And he will make the face of heaven so fine



And pay no worship to the garish sun.



But not possess'd it; and though I am sold,



As is the night before some festival

 

And may not wear them. O, here comes my nurse,



And she brings news; and every tongue that speaks

But Romeo's name speaks heavenly eloquence.





Alack, alack, that heaven should practise stratagems



By leaving earth? Comfort me, counsel me.



Alack the day! he's gone, he's kill'd, he's dead!







 







And that bare vowel 'I' shall poison more









Brief sounds determine of my weal or woe.





A piteous corse, a bloody piteous corse;



All in gore-blood. I swounded at the sight.



But the true ground of all these piteous woes



And thou and Romeo press one heavy bier!

Bal. It doth so, holy sir; and there's my master,

















An you be not, hang, beg, starve, die in the streets,



An you be mine, I'll give you to my friend;





Beautiful tyrant! fiend angelical!





But, an you will not wed, I'll pardon you.

A damned saint, an honourable villain!











A whining mammet, in her fortune's tender,



And then to have a wretched puling fool,

All forsworn, all naught, all dissemblers.

Ah, where's my man? Give me some aqua vitae.











A gentleman of princely parentage,









Ah, poor my lord, what tongue shall smooth thy name



But wherefore, villain, didst thou kill my cousin?



Back, foolish tears, back to your native spring!

And Juliet bleeding, warm, and newly dead,



At home, abroad, alone, in company,

And Tybalt's dead, that would have slain my husband.

All this is comfort; wherefore weep I then?



Cap. God's bread I it makes me mad. Day, night, late, early,

But O, it presses to my memory











Bal. Romeo.

And needly will be rank'd with other griefs,







But with a rearward following Tybalt's death,

Cap. Peace, you mumbling fool!



All slain, all dead. 'Romeo is banished'-



Cap. O, God-i-god-en!





 







Both you and I, for Romeo is exil'd.

Cap. And why, my Lady Wisdom? Hold your tongue,

But I, a maid, die maiden-widowed.

Come, cords; come, nurse. I'll to my wedding bed;

And death, not Romeo, take my maidenhead!











And bid him come to take his last farewell.



 

And that we have a curse in having her.



 

But now I see this one is one too much,

 



Affliction is enanmour'd of thy parts,

And thou art wedded to calamity.

 



 



 









Cap. Hang thee, young baggage! disobedient wretch!













Be patient, for the world is broad and wide.



But purgatory, torture, hell itself.



And world's exile is death. Then 'banishment'



Bal. Full half an hour.

And smilest upon the stroke that murders me.







And turn'd that black word death to banishment.

But fettle your fine joints 'gainst Thursday next





And little mouse, every unworthy thing,



But Romeo may not. More validity,



And yet 'not proud'? Mistress minion you,



And steal immortal blessing from her lips,



Cap. How, how, how, how, choplogic? What is this?

But Romeo may not- he is banished.





And sayest thou yet that exile is not death?



But thankful even for hate that is meant love.

But 'banished' to kill me- 'banished'?





Being a divine, a ghostly confessor,

A sin-absolver, and my friend profess'd,









Adversity's sweet milk, philosophy,







Cap. Soft! take me with you, take me with you, wife.













An hour but married, Tybalt murdered,





And fall upon the ground, as I do now,

Bal. I dare not, sir.

























But for the sunset of my brother's son

 



 

Cap. When the sun sets the air doth drizzle dew,





 





 



Blubb'ring and weeping, weeping and blubbering.

And see how be will take it at your hands.























And now falls on her bed, and then starts up,

And Tybalt calls; and then on Romeo cries,

And then down falls again.







And fearfully did menace me with death









Art thou a man? Thy form cries out thou art;

Come, go, good Juliet. I dare no longer stay.













And slay thy lady that in thy life lives,

By doing damned hate upon thyself?

Among a sisterhood of holy nuns.









And usest none in that true use indeed

And Paris too. Come, I'll dispose of thee



But now I'll tell thee joyful tidings, girl.













And thou dismemb'red with thine own defence.

A greater power than we can contradict





But thou slewest Tybalt. There art thou happy too.



And turns it to exile. There art thou happy.

A pack of blessings light upon thy back;



But, like a misbhav'd and sullen wench,







Ascend her chamber, hence and comfort her.

But look thou stay not till the watch be set,





And there I am. Where is my Romeo?

Beg pardon of the Prince, and call thee back







And bid her hasten all the house to bed,





Bal. As I did sleep under this yew tree here,





And then I hope thou wilt be satisfied.















And he shall signify from time to time



And that my master slew him.







And yet no man like he doth grieve my heart.

 



CAPULET'S house.

 



 

Cap. Things have fall'n out, sir, so unluckily





And so did I. Well, we were born to die.

 





As that the villain lives which slaughter'd him.







Cap. Sir Paris, I will make a desperate tender







Acquaint her here of my son Paris' love

And bid her (mark you me?) on Wednesday next-

But, soft! what day is this?



Cap. Monday! ha, ha! Well, Wednesday is too soon.





 





But much of grief shows still some want of wit.

Being our kinsman, if we revel much.



And there an end. But what say you to Thursday?



Cap. Well, get you gone. A Thursday be it then.

An if thou couldst, thou couldst not make him live.





Afore me, It is so very very late







 



CAPULET'S orchard.

 



 





And steep'd in blood? Ah, what an unkind hour



Believe me, love, it was the nightingale.







 





 





And light thee on the way to Mantua.

But send him back.















Come, death, and welcome! Juliet wills it so.













As one dead in the bottom of a tomb.











 



 

Anon comes one with light to ope the tomb;















Contempt and beggary hangs upon thy back:
Could draw to part them, was stout Tybalt slain;
Could not take truce with the unruly spleen
Could to no issue of true honour bring.
Could we but learn from whence his sorrows grow,
County Anselmo and his beauteous sisters;
Couple it with something; make it a word and a blow.
Cousin Cap. By'r Lady, thirty years.
Cousin Cap. 'Tis more, 'tis more! His son is elder, sir;
Cry but 'Ay me!' pronounce but 'love' and 'dove';
Culling of simples. Meagre were his looks,
Cuts beauty off from all posterity.
Dead art thou, dead! alack, my child is dead,
Death is my son-in-law, Death is my heir;
Death lies on her like an untimely frost
Death, lie thou there, by a dead man interr'd.
Death, that hath suck'd the honey of thy breath,
Delay this marriage for a month, a week;
Deny thy father and refuse thy name!
Depart again. Here, here will I remain
Despised substance of divinest show!
Did ever dragon keep so fair a cave?
Did murther her; as that name's cursed hand
Did my heart love till now? Forswear it, sight!
Did not attend him as we rode? I think
Digressing from the valour of a man;
Direct my sail! On, lusty gentlemen!
Displant a town, reverse a prince's doom,
Do I live dead that live to tell it now.
Do as thou wilt, for I have done with thee. Exit.
Do ebb and flow with tears; the bark thy body is
Doing more murther in this loathsome world,
Do lace the severing clouds in yonder East.
Dost thou love me, I know thou wilt say 'Ay';
Dost thou not bring me letters from the friar?
Dost thou not laugh?
Doth add more grief to too much of mine own.
Doth couch his limbs, there golden sleep doth reign.
Doth grace for grace and love for love allow.
Doth hurry from the fatal cannon's womb.
Doth make against me, of this direful murther;
Doth make against me, of this direful murther;
Doth much excuse the appertaining rage
Doth my name lodge? Tell me, that I may sack
Doth not she think me an old murtherer,
Do thou but call my resolution wise
Do thou but close our hands with holy words,
Doth with their death bury their parents' strife.
Doting like me, and like me banished,
Dove-feather'd raven! wolvish-ravening lamb!
 Down with the Capulets! Down with the Montagues!
Do you not see that I am out of breath?
Drawn with a team of little atomies
Driving back shadows over low'ring hills.
Drums in his ear, at which he starts and wakes,
Dry sorrow drinks our blood. Adieu, adieu!
Dry up your tears and stick your rosemary
Each part, depriv'd of supple government,
Earth-treading stars that make dark heaven light.
Either be gone before the watch be set,
Either my eyesight fails, or thou look'st pale.
Either thou or I, or both, must go with him.
Either withdraw unto some private place
Else, when he is found, that hour is his last.
Else would I tear the cave where Echo lies,
Else would a maiden blush bepaint my cheek
Enter ABRAM and BALTHASAR, two SERVINGMEN of the MONTAGUES.
Enter APOTHECARY.
Enter BALTHASAR, Romeo's man, booted.
Enter BENVOLIO.
Enter BENVOLIO.
Enter BENVOLIO and MERCUTIO.
Enter BENVOLIO and ROMEO.
Enter BENVOLIO with MERCUTIO.
Enter CAPULET.
Enter CAPULET.
Enter CAPULET, COUNTY PARIS, and SERVANT - the ClOWN.
Enter CAPULET, LADY CAPULET, JULIET, TYBALT, NURSE
Enter CAPULET, LADY CAPULET, NURSE, and two or three Servingmen.
Enter CAPULET, LADY CAPULET and PARIS.
Enter CAPULET and LADY CAPULET [and SERVANT].
Enter CAPULET and LADY CAPULET [and SERVANT].
Enter CAPULET and NURSE.
Enter CHORUS.
Enter CHORUS.
Enter CITIZENS.
Enter FRIAR JOHN.
Enter FRIAR LAURENCE.
Enter FRIAR [LAURENCE].
Enter FRIAR LAURENCE alone, with a basket.
Enter FRIAR [LAURENCE] and PARIS.
Enter FRIAR [LAURENCE] and PARIS, with Musicians.
Enter FRIAR [LAURENCE] and ROMEO.
Enter FRIAR [LAURENCE], with lantern, crow and spade.
Enter JULIET.
Enter JULIET.
Enter JULIET.
 [Enter JULIET.]
Enter JULIET.
[Enter JULIET above.]
[Enter JULIET above again].
[Enter JULIET above at a window.]
Enter JULIET alone.
Enter JULIET and NURSE.
Enter JULIET somewhat fast and embraces Romeo.
Enter LADY CAPULET.
Enter LADY CAPULET.
Enter LADY CAPULET.
Enter LADY CAPULET and NURSE.
Enter LADY CAPULET and NURSE.
Enter MERCUTIO, BENVOLIO and Men.
Enter MONTAGUE [and SERVANTS].
Enter MONTAGUE [and SERVANTS].
Enter NURSE.
Enter NURSE.
Enter NURSE [and PETER].
Enter NURSE and her Man [PETER].
Enter NURSE hastily
[Enter NURSE with cords, wringing her hands.]
Enter [PARIS'S] PAGE and Watchmen.
Enter PARIS and his PAGE, with flowers and sweet water.
Enter PETER.
Enter PRINCE, MONTAGUE, CAPULET,  their WIVES and ALL.
Enter Prince ESCALUS with his TRAIN.
Enter ROMEO.
Enter ROMEO.
Enter ROMEO.
Enter ROMEO.
Enter ROMEO.
Enter ROMEO.
Enter ROMEO, MERCUTIO, BENVOLIO,
Enter ROMEO alone.
Enter ROMEO, and BALTHASAR with a torch, a mattock
Enter ROMEO and JULIET aloft at the window.
Enter SAMSON and GREGORY, of the house of Capulet, with swords and bucklers.
Enter TYBALT.
Enter TYBALT.
Enter TYBALT and others.
Enter a SERVINGMAN.
Enter another Whatchman with FRIAR LAURENCE.
Enter another Whatchman with FRIAR LAURENCE.
Enter old CAPULET in his gown, and LADY CAPULET.
Enter old MONTAGUE and LADY MONTAGUE.
Enter [several Watchmen with] BALTHASAR.
Enter [several Watchmen with] BALTHASAR.
Enter several of both houses, who join yhe fray;
Enter the PRINCE [and ATTENDANTS].
Enter the PRINCE [and ATTENDANTS].
[Enter three or four SERVINGMEN with spits and logs and baskets.]
Environed with all these hideous fears,
Ere I again behold my Romeo!
Ere he can spread his sweet leaves to the air
Ere he that should be husband comes to woo.
Ere one can say 'It lightens.' Sweet, good night!
Ere we may think her ripe to be a bride.
Even now the frozen bosom of the North
Evermore showring? In one little body
Every good hap to you that chances here.
Examine every married lineament,
Examine other beauties.
[Exeunt.]
[Exeunt.]
[Exeunt.]
[Exeunt.]
[Exeunt.]
[Exeunt.]
[Exeunt.]
[Exeunt.]
[Exeunt.]
[Exeunt.]
[Exeunt.]
[Exeunt.]
[Exeunt.]
[Exeunt.]
[Exeunt.]
[Exeunt.]
[Exeunt.]
[Exeunt.]
[Exeunt BENVOLIO and MERCUTIO.]
[Exeunt CAPULET and PARIS].
[Exeunt CAPULET and SERVINGMEN.]
[Exeunt JULIET and NURSE.]
Exeunt [LADY CAPULETMother and NURSE.]
[Exeunt LADY CAPULET and NURSE.]
[Exeunt MERCUTIO and BENVOLIO.]
[Exeunt MONTAGUE and LADY MONTAGUE].
[Exeunt all but JULIET and NURSE].
[Exeunt all but MONTAGUE, LADY MONTAGUE and BENVOLIO].
[Exeunt all but the NURSE and Musicians, casting rosemary
[Exeunt some Watchmen.]
[Exeunt some Watchmen.]
[Exeunt some Watchmen.]
[Exeunt some Watchmen.]
[Exit.]
[Exit.]
[Exit.]
[Exit.]
[Exit.]
[Exit.]
[Exit.]
[Exit.]
[Exit BALTHASAR].
[Exit FRIAR LAURENCE].
[Exit JULIET.]
[Exit. MERCUTIO with BENVOLIO].
[Exit NURSE.]
[Exit PAGE.]
[Exit PAGE]
[Exit ROMEO.]
[Exit  Servingman.]
Exit TYBALT [with his followers].
FRIAR LAURENCE'S cell.
FRIAR LAURENCE'S  cell.
FRIAR LAURENCE'S cell.
[FRIAR stoops and looks on the blood and weapons.]
Fain would I dwell on form- fain, fain deny
Farewell.
Farewell. Be trusty, and I'll quit thy pains.
Farewell. Buy food and get thyself in flesh.
Farewell. Commend me to thy mistress.
Farewell, My lord.- Light to my chamber, ho!
Farewell. Thou canst not teach me to forget.
Farewell, dear father.
Farewell, my coz.
Feather of lead, bright smoke, cold fire, sick health!
Fetch me my rapier, boy. [Exit boy.] What, dares the slave
Fie, fie, thou shamest thy shape, thy love, thy wit,
Fie, how my bones ache! What a jaunce have I had!
Find written in the margent of his eyes,
First Ser. Away with the join-stools, remove the court-cubbert, look
First Ser. Where's Potpan, that he helps not to take away?
First Ser. You are looke't for and call'd for, ask't for and sought
Five times in that ere once in our five wits.
Flower as she was, deflowered by him.
Fly hence and leave me. Think upon these gone;
For I am proverb'd with a grandsire phrase,
For I am sure you have your hands full all
For I come hither arm'd against myself.
For I had then laid wormwood to my dug,
For I have need of many orisons
For I ne'er saw true beauty till this night.
For I will raise her Statue in pure gold,
For Juliet's sake, for her sake, rise and stand!
For Venus smiles not in a house of tears.
For beauty, starv'd with her severity,
Forbid this bandying in Verona streets.
For blood of ours shed blood of Montague.
For, by my soul, I'll ne'er acknowledge thee,
For, by your leaves, you shall not stay alone
For even the day before, she broke her brow;
For exile hath more terror in his look,
For fair without the fair within to hide.
For fear of that I still will stay with thee
Forgetting any other home but this.
Forgive me, cousin.' Ah, dear Juliet,
For hark you, Tybalt being slain so late,
For he hath still been tried a holy man.
For here lies Juliet, and her beauty makes
For here we need it not.
For in a minute there are many days.
For it excels your first; or if it did not,
For it was bad enough before their spite.
For men so old as we to keep the peace.
For naught so vile that on the earth doth live
For never was a story of more woe
For nothing can be ill if she be well.
For now, these hot days, is the mad blood stirring.
For saints have hands that pilgrims' hands do touch,
For so he said he would. I hear him near.
For still thy eyes, which I may call the sea,
For stony limits cannot hold love out,
For such a wish! He was not born to shame.
For sweet discourses in our time to come.
Forth Ser. We cannot be here and there too. Cheerly, boys!
For that which thou hast heard me speak to-night.
For then I hope thou wilt not keep him long
For then she could stand high-lone; nay, by th' rood,
For then thou canst not pass to Mantua,
For this alliance may so happy prove
For this, being smelt, with that part cheers each part;
For this night's watching.
For this time all the rest depart away.
For though fond nature bids us all lament,
For thou wilt lie upon the wings of night
For 'tis a throne where honour may be crown'd
For 'twas your heaven she should be advanc'd;
For well you know this is a pitiful case. [Exit.]
For who is living, if those two are gone?
For whom, and not for Tybalt, Juliet pin'd.
For whom, and not for Tybalt, Juliet pin'd.
For whose dear sake thou wast but lately dead.
For you and I are past our dancing days.
Friar. Hark, how they knock! Who's there? Romeo, arise;
Friar J. Brother, I'll go and bring it thee. [Exit.]
Friar J. Going to find a barefoot brother out,
Friar J. Holy Franciscan Friar, Brother, ho!
Friar J. I could not send it- here it is again-
Friar LAURENCE'S cell.
Friar L. A gentler judgment vanish'd from his lips-
Friar L. Ah, Juliet, I already know thy grief;
Friar L. Arise; one knocks. Good Romeo, hide thyself.
Friar L. Benedicite!
Friar L. Be plain, good son, and homely in thy drift
Friar L. Bliss be upon you! Tell me, good my friend,
Friar L. Come, come with me, and we will make short work;
Friar L. Come, is the bride ready to go to church?
Friar L. For doting, not for loving, pupil mine.
Friar L. God pardon sin! Wast thou with Rosaline?
Friar L. Go hence; good night; and here stands all your state:
Friar L. Go with me to the vault.
Friar L. Hence from Verona art thou banished.
Friar L. Hold! Get you gone, be strong and prosperous
Friar L. Hold, daughter. I do spy a kind of hope,
Friar L. Hold, then. Go home, be merry, give consent
Friar L. Hold thy desperate hand.
Friar L. Holy Saint Francis! What a change is here!
Friar L. How long hath he been there?
Friar L. I am the greatest, able to do least,
Friar L. I am the greatest, able to do least,
Friar L. I hear some noise. Lady, come from that nest
Friar L. I'll give thee armour to keep off that word;
Friar L. I will be brief, for my short date of breath
Friar L. I will be brief, for my short date of breath
Friar L. Let me dispute with thee of thy estate.
Friar L. My leisure serves me, pensive daughter, now.
Friar L. Not in a grave
Friar L. Now, must I to the monument alone.
Friar L. O deadly sin! O rude unthankfulness!
Friar L. On Thursday, sir? The time is very short.
Friar L. O, she knew well
Friar L. O, then I see that madmen have no ears.
Friar L. O woeful sympathy!
Friar L. Peace, ho, for shame! Confusion's cure lives not
Friar L. Romeo!
Friar L. Romeo, come forth; come forth, thou fearful man.
Friar L. Romeo shall thank thee, daughter, for us both.
Friar L. Saint Francis be my speed! how oft to-night
Friar L. Sir, go you in; and, madam, go with him;
Friar L. So smile the heavens upon this holy act
Friar L. Stay then; I'll go alone. Fear comes upon me.
Friar L. That's a certain text.
Friar L. That's my good son! But where hast thou been then?
Friar L. The grey-ey'd morn smiles on the frowning night,
Friar L. There on the ground, with his own tears made drunk.
Friar L. These violent delights have violent ends
Friar L. This same should be the voice of Friar John.
Friar L. Thou fond mad man, hear me a little speak.
Friar L. Too familiar
Friar L. Unhappy fortune! By my brotherhood,
Friar L. Welcome then.
Friar L. Who bare my letter, then, to Romeo?
Friar L. Who is it?
Friar L. Wisely, and slow. They stumble that run fast.
Friar L. You say you do not know the lady's mind.
Friar L. [aside] I would I knew not why it should be slow'd.-
From Love's weak childish bow she lives unharm'd.
From ancient grudge break to new mutiny,
From forth day's path and Titan's fiery wheels.
From forth the fatal loins of these two foes
From off the battlements of yonder tower,
From this world-wearied flesh. Eyes, look your last!
Full soon the canker death eats up that plant.
Gentlemen, for shame! forbear this outrage!
Gentlemen, good den. A word with one of you.
Get me an iron crow and bring it straight
Get thee to bed, and rest; for thou hast need.
Get you to bed! Faith, you'll be sick to-morrow
Give me a case to put my visage in.
Give me my Romeo; and, when he shall die,
Give me my sin again. [He Kisses her.]
Give me some present counsel; or, behold,
Give me the light. Upon thy life I charge thee,
Give me those flowers. Do as I bid thee, go.
Give me thy hand. 'Tis late. Farewell; good night.
[Giving back the paper.]
Go; I'll to dinner; hie you to the cell.
Go before, nurse. Commend me to thy lady,
God forbid! Where's this girl? What, Juliet!
God join'd my heart and Romeo's, thou our hands;
God pardon him! I do, with all my heart;
-God save the mark!- here on his manly breast.
'God send me no need of thee!' and by the operation of the second
Go get thee to thy love, as was decreed,
Go hence, to have more talk of these sad things;
Go in; and tell my lady I am gone,
Good Prudence. Smatter with your gossips, go!
-Good faith! 'Tis day! [Play music.]
Good gentle youth, tempt not a desp'rate man.
Good night.
Good night, good night! As sweet repose and rest
Good night, good night! Parting is such sweet sorrow,
Gorg'd with the dearest morsel of the earth,
Go, sirrah, trudge about
Go, some of you; whoe'er you find attach.
Go, some of you; whoe'er you find attach.
Go, tell the Prince; run to the Capulets;
Go, tell the Prince; run to the Capulets;
Go thither, and with unattainted eye
Go thou to Juliet, help to deck up her.
Go waken Juliet; go and trim her up.
Go you to Juliet ere you go to bed;
Graze where you will, you shall not house with me.
Green earthen pots, bladders, and musty seeds,
Greg. Ay, while you live, draw your neck out of collar.
Greg. But thou art not quickly moved to strike.
Greg. Do you quarrel, sir?
Greg. How? turn thy back and run?
Greg. I will frown as I pass by, and let them take it as they list.
Greg. No, for then we should be colliers.
Greg. No, marry. I fear thee!
Greg. That shows thee a weak slave; for the weakest goes to the
Greg. The heads of the maids?
Greg. The quarrel is between our masters and us their men.
Greg. They must take it in sense that feel it.
Greg. 'Tis well thou art not fish; if thou hadst, thou hadst been
Greg. To move is to stir, and to be valiant is to stand.
Greg. [aside to SAMPSON] Say 'better.' Here comes one of my
Greg. [aside to SAMSON] No.
Grief of my son's exile hath stopp'd her breath.
Grief of my son's exile hath stopp'd her breath.
Griefs of mine own lie heavy in my breast,
Had I it written, I would tear the word.
Had part in this fair maid! now heaven hath all,
Had she affections and warm youthful blood,
Hadst thou no poison mix'd, no sharp-ground knife,
Haply some poison yet doth hang on them
Happiness courts thee in her best array;
Hark ye, your Romeo will be here at night.
Hast thou met with him? Send thy man away.
Hast thou no letters to me from the friar?
Hast thou slain Tybalt? Wilt thou slay thyself?
Hath Death lain with thy wife. See, there she lies,
Hath Romeo slain himself? Say thou but 'I,'
Hath been my kinsman. O sweet Juliet,
Hath had no notice of these accidents;
Hath had no power yet upon thy beauty.
Hath not so green, so quick, so fair an eye
Hath sent a letter to his father's house.
Hath slain ten thousand Tybalts. Tybalt's death
Hath sorted out a sudden day of joy
Hath thwarted our intents. Come, come away.
Hath wash'd thy sallow cheeks for Rosaline!
Have at thee, coward!
Have lost a brace of kinsmen. All are punish'd.
Have my old feet stumbled at graves! Who's there?
Have they been merry! which their keepers call
Have thrice disturb'd the quiet of our streets
Have you delivered to her our decree?
Having displeas'd my father, to Laurence' cell,
Having some business, do entreat her eyes
Hear me with patience but to speak a word.
[He goes down.]
He heareth not, he stirreth not, be moveth not;
He jests at scars that never felt a wound.
[He leaps the orchad-wall.]
Helen and Hero hildings and harlots, This be a gray eye or so,
He lent me counsel, and I lent him eyes.
He'll fright you up, i' faith. Will it not be?
Help, help! Call help.
He made you for a highway to my bed;
Hence banished is banish'd from the world,
Henceforth I never will be Romeo.
Henceforward I am ever rul'd by you.
Henceforward do your messages yourself.
Hence will I to my ghostly father's cell,
Her Nurse is privy; and if aught in this
Her Nurse is privy; and if aught in this
Her blood is settled, and her joints are stiff;
Her body sleeps in Capel's monument,
Her chariot is an empty hazelnut,
Her collars, of the moonshine's wat'ry beams;
Here are the beetle brows shall blush for me.
Here comes the lady. O, so light a foot
Here in Verona, ladies of esteem,
Here in my house do him disparagement.
Here in the churchyard; yet I will adventure. [Retires.]
Here in this city visiting the sick,
Here lives a caitiff wretch would sell it him.'
Here's much to do with hate, but more with love.
Here's to my love! [He drinks.] O true apothecary!
Her eye discourses; I will answer it.
Her mother is the lady of the house.
Herself pois'd with herself in either eye;
Her traces, of the smallest spider's web;
Her vestal livery is but sick and green,
Her wagoner, a small grey-coated gnat,
Her wagon spokes made of long spinners' legs,
Her whip, of cricket's bone; the lash, of film;
He shall not make me there a joyful bride!
He shift a trencher! he scrape a trencher!
He swung about his head and cut the winds,
He that is strucken blind cannot forget
He told me Paris should have married Juliet.
[He walks by them and sings.]
Hie you, make haste, for it grows very late. Exit.
Hie you to church; I must another way,
His agile arm beats down their fatal points,
His fault concludes but what the law should end,
His help to crave and my dear hap to tell.
His looks I fear, and his intents I doubt. [Retires.]
His son is thirty.
His son was but a ward two years ago.
Hold, Tybalt! Good Mercutio!
'Hold, friends! friends, part!' and swifter than his tongue,
Holding thine ear close to the hollow ground.
Hold, take this letter. Early in the morning
Hold, there is forty ducats. Let me have
Hood my unmann'd blood, bating in my cheeks,
How? Will she none? Doth she not give us thanks?
How doth my lady? Is my father well?
How fares my Juliet? That I ask again,
How if, when I am laid into the tomb,
How is't, my soul? Let's talk; it is not day.
Howling attends it! How hast thou the heart,
How long is't now since last yourself and I
How much salt water thrown away in waste,
How nice the quarrel was, and urg'd withal
How now, a conduit, girl? What, still in tears?
How oft when men are at the point of death
How shall that faith return again to earth
How silver-sweet sound lovers' tongues by night,
How stands your disposition to be married?
Hunting thee hence with hunt's-up to the day!
I am content, so thou wilt have it so.
I am no pilot; yet, wert thou as far
I am not I, if there be such an 'I';
I am the drudge, and toil in your delight;
I am too bold; 'tis not to me she speaks.
I am too young, I pray you pardon me'!
I bade her come. What, lamb! what ladybird!
I bear no hatred, blessed man, for, lo,
I beg for justice, which thou, Prince, must give.
I bring thee tidings of the Prince's doom.
I came to talk of. Tell me, daughter Juliet,
I cannot bound a pitch above dull woe.
I cannot choose but ever weep the friend.
I charge thee in the Prince's name obey.
I come from Lady Juliet.
I conjure only but to raise up him.
I conjure thee by Rosaline's bright eyes.
I do beseech thee-
I do remember an apothecary,
I do remember well where I should be,
I dreamt my lady came and found me dead
I dreamt my master and another fought,
I drew to part them. In the instant came
If I departed not and left him there.
If I departed not and left him there.
If I did stay to look on his intents.
If I profane with my unworthiest hand
If all else fail, myself have power to die.
If any of my kinsmen find thee here.
If be be slain, say 'I'; or if not, 'no.'
I fear it is; and yet methinks it should not,
If e'er thou wast thyself, and these woes thine,
If ever you disturb our streets again,
If good, thou shamest the music of sweet news
If in thy wisdom thou canst give no help,
If no inconstant toy nor womanish fear
If, rather than to marry County Paris
If that thy bent of love be honourable,
If thou art Dun, we'll draw thee from the mire
If thou art fickle, what dost thou with him
If thou art taken. Hence, be gone, away!
If thou dost love, pronounce it faithfully.
If what thou speak'st speak not of remedy.
I have a faint cold fear thrills through my veins
I have an interest in your hate's proceeding,
I have been feasting with mine enemy,
I have forgot that name, and that name's woe.
I have forgot why I did call thee back.
I have more care to stay than will to go.
I have no joy of this contract to-night.
I have rememb'red me, thou's hear our counsel.
I hear some noise within. Dear love, adieu!
I hear thou must, and nothing may prorogue it,
I know not how to tell thee who I am.
I'll be a candle-holder and look on;
I'll bury thee in a triumphant grave.
I'll call them back again to comfort me.
I'll find those that shall. Scurvy knave! I am none of his
I'll frown, and be perverse, and say thee nay,
I'll go and chat with Paris. Hie, make haste,
I'll have this knot knit up to-morrow morning.
I'll know his grievance, or be much denied.
I'll make you quiet; what!- Cheerly, my hearts!
I'll not endure him.
I'll not to bed to-night; let me alone.
I'll play the housewife for this once. What, ho!
I'll say yon grey is not the morning's eye,
I'll tell thee as we pass; but this I pray,
I'll to him; he is hid at Laurence' cell.
I'll to my rest.
I'll to the friar to know his remedy.
I'll warrant you, when I say so, she looks as pale as any clout
I married them; and their stol'n marriage day
I married them; and their stol'n marriage day
I- measuring his affections by my own,
Immediately we do exile him hence.
I must be gone and live, or stay and die.
I must hear from thee every day in the hour,
I must needs wake you. Lady! lady! lady!
I must up-fill this osier cage of ours
In all her best array bear her to church;
In all respects by me; nay more, I doubt it not.
In carrion flies than Romeo. They may seize
In dear employment. Therefore hence, be gone.
I needs must wake her. Madam, madam, madam!
I never should forget it. 'Wilt thou not, Jule?' quoth he,
In fair Verona, where we lay our scene,
In half an hour she 'promis'd to return.
Inherit at my house. Hear all, all see,
In lasting labour of his pilgrimage!
In man as well as herbs- grace and rude will;
In mortal paradise of such sweet flesh?
In my behalf- my reputation stain'd
In one respect I'll thy assistant be;
In penalty alike; and 'tis not hard, I think,
In plants, herbs, stones, and their true qualities;
In sadness, cousin, I do love a woman.
In shape no bigger than an agate stone
In such a gorgeous palace!
In tatt'red weeds, with overwhelming brows,
In that dim monument where Tybalt lies.
In that word's death; no words can that woe sound.
In thee at once; which thou at once wouldst lose.
In the mean time, against thou shalt awake,
In these confusions. Heaven and yourself
In this resolve. I'll send a friar with speed
In this so sudden business.
In thy best robes uncovered on the bier
In truth, fair Montague, I am too fond,
I nurs'd her daughter that you talk'd withal.
In what I farther shall intend to do,
In what vile part of this anatomy
I pray thee leave me to myself to-night;
I pray you tell my lord and father, madam,
I promise you, but for your company,
Is Romeo slaught'red, and is Tybalt dead?
Is Rosaline, that thou didst love so dear,
I saw her laid low in her kindred's vault
Is but a little way above our heads,
Is crimson in thy lips and in thy cheeks,
Is death misterm'd. Calling death 'banishment,'
Is death to any he that utters them.
I sell thee poison; thou hast sold me none.
Is empty on the back of Montague,
Is empty on the back of Montague,
Is fair and honest: in his mistress' name,
Is father, mother, Tybalt, Romeo, Juliet,
Is guilty of this lamentable chance? The lady stirs.
Is he gone and hath nothing?
I should have been more strange, I must confess,
Is it e'en so? Why then, I thank you all.
Is it more sin to wish me thus forsworn,
Is loathsome in his own deliciousness
Is longer than the tale thou dost excuse.
Is my dear son with such sour company.
Is my poor heart so for a kinsman vex'd.
Is not so long as is a tedious tale.
Is not so long as is a tedious tale.
Is now the two hours' traffic of our stage;
Is partly to behold my lady's face,
Is she not down so late, or up so early?
Is she not proud? Doth she not count her blest,
Is this the poultice for my aching bones?
Is three long hours; yet she is not come.
Is thy news good or bad? Answer to that.
Is to himself- I will not say how true-
Is too much for a score
Is very good meat in Lent;
Italy; and as soon moved to be moody, and as soon moody to be
It back to Tybalt, whose dexterity
It beats as it would fall in twenty pieces.
It best agrees with night. Come, civil night,
It burneth in the Capels' monument.
It cannot countervail the exchange of joy
I tell thee what- get thee to church a Thursday
I tell you, he that can lay hold of her
I thank you, honest gentlemen. Good night.
It helps not, it prevails not. Talk no more.
I think it best you married with the County.
I think you are happy in this second match,
I thought thy disposition better temper'd.
It is enough I may but call her mine.
It is my lady; O, it is my love!
It is my will; the which if thou respect,
It is some meteor that the sun exhales
It is supposed the fair creature died-
It is the East, and Juliet is the sun!
It is the lark that sings so out of tune,
It is too rash, too unadvis'd, too sudden;
It may be thought we held him carelessly,
It rains downright.
It seems she hangs upon the cheek of night
It shall be Romeo, whom you know I hate,
It strains me past the compass of my wits.
It was the nightingale, and not the lark,
It were a grief so brief to part with thee.
I wake before the time that Romeo
I warrant, an I should live a thousand yeas,
I was your mother much upon these years
I will be deaf to pleading and excuses;
I will carry no crotchets. I'll re you, I'll fa you. Do you note
I will not budge for no man's pleasure, I.
I will not entertain so bad a thought.
I will not marry yet; and when I do, I swear
I will omit no opportunity
I will withdraw; but this intrusion shall,
I wonder at this haste, that I must wed
I would adventure for such merchandise.
I would have been abed an hour ago.
I would not for the wealth of all this town
I would say thou hadst suck'd wisdom from thy teat.
I would the fool were married to her grave!
JULIET'S chamber.
JULIET'S chamber.
JULIET rises.
Jesu Maria! What a deal of brine
Juiet. And joy comes well in such a needy time.
Juiet. Hie to high fortune! Honest nurse, farewell.
Juiet. Hist! Romeo, hist! O for a falconer's voice
Juiet. Shall I speak ill of him that is my husband?
Juiet. 'Tis but thy name that is my enemy.
Jul. I have.
Juliet. Amen!
Juliet. Ancient damnation! O most wicked fiend!
Juliet. And stint thou too, I pray thee, nurse, say I.
Juliet. A rhyme I learnt even now
Juliet. Art thou gone so, my lord, my love, my friend?
Juliet. As much to him, else is his thanks too much.
Juliet. A thousand times good night! [Exit JULIET above].
Juliet. At what o'clock to-morrow
Juliet. Ay, madam, from the reach of these my hands.
Juliet. Ay me!
Juliet. Ay me! what news? Why dost thou wring thy hands
Juliet. Ay, pilgrim, lips that they must use in pray'r.
Juliet. Ay, those attires are best; but, gentle nurse,
Juliet. Blister'd be thy tongue
Juliet. But to be frank and give it thee again.
Juliet. By-and-by I come.-
Juliet. By whose direction found'st thou out this place?
Juliet. Can heaven be so envious?
Juliet. Come hither, nurse. What is yond gentleman?
Juliet. Conceit, more rich in matter than in words,
Juliet. Do not swear at all;
Juliet. Farewell! God knows when we shall meet again.
Juliet. Feeling so the loss,
Juliet. Gallop apace, you fiery-footed steeds,
Juliet. Give me, give me! O, tell not me of fear!
Juliet. Go ask his name.- If he be married,
Juliet. Go, get thee hence, for I will not away.
Juliet. Good even to my ghostly confessor.
Juliet. Good father, I beseech you on my knees,
Juliet. Good pilgrim, you do wrong your hand too much,
Juliet. Here's such a coil! Come, what says Romeo?
Juliet. How art thou out of breath when thou hast breath
Juliet. How cam'st thou hither, tell me, and wherefore?
Juliet. How now? Who calls?
Juliet. I come, anon.- But if thou meanest not well,
Juliet. If I do so, it will be of more price,
Juliet. I' faith, I am sorry that thou art not well.
Juliet. If they do see thee, they will murther thee.
Juliet. I gave thee mine before thou didst request it;
Juliet. I'll look to like, if looking liking move;
Juliet. I met the youthful lord at Laurence' cell
Juliet. Indeed I never shall be satisfied
Juliet. I shall forget, to have thee still stand there,
Juliet. Is there no pity sitting in the clouds
Juliet. It is an honour that I dream not of.
Juliet. It is, it is! Hie hence, be gone, away!
Juliet. It may be so, for it is not mine own.
Juliet. I will confess to you that I love him.
Juliet. I will not fail. 'Tis twenty years till then.
Juliet. I would not for the world they saw thee here.
Juliet. I would thou hadst my bones, and I thy news.
Juliet. Love give me strength! and strength shall help afford.
Juliet. Madam, I am here.
Juliet. Madam, I am not well.
Juliet. Madam, in happy time! What day is that?
Juliet. My ears have yet not drunk a hundred words
Juliet. My only love, sprung from my only hate!
Juliet. No, madam; we have cull'd such necessaries
Juliet. No, no. But all this did I know before.
Juliet. Not proud you have, but thankful that you have.
Juliet. Now by Saint Peter's Church, and Peter too,
Juliet. Now, good sweet nurse- O Lord, why look'st thou sad?
Juliet. Nurse?
Juliet. Nurse, will you go with me into my closet
Juliet. O Fortune, Fortune! all men call thee fickle.
Juliet. O God! Did Romeo's hand shed Tybalt's blood?
Juliet. O God, I have an ill-divining soul!
Juliet. O God!- O nurse, how shall this be prevented?
Juliet. O Romeo, Romeo! wherefore art thou Romeo?
Juliet. O, bid me leap, rather than marry Paris,
Juliet. O, break, my heart! poor bankrout, break at once!
Juliet. O comfortable Friar! where is my lord?
Juliet. O, find him! give this ring to my true knight
Juliet. O serpent heart, hid with a flow'ring face!
Juliet. O, shut the door! and when thou hast done so,
Juliet. O, swear not by the moon, th' inconstant moon,
Juliet. O, think'st thou we shall ever meet again?
Juliet. Romeo!
Juliet. Saints do not move, though grant for prayers' sake.
Juliet. Speak'st thou this from thy heart?
Juliet. Sweet, so would I.
Juliet. Tell me not, friar, that thou hear'st of this,
Juliet. That is no slander, sir, which is a truth;
Juliet. That may be, sir, when I may be a wife.
Juliet. The clock struck nine when I did send the nurse;
Juliet. Then have my lips the sin that they have took.
Juliet. Then, window, let day in, and let life out.
Juliet. The tears have got small victory by that,
Juliet. Thou knowest the mask of night is on my face;
Juliet. Three words, dear Romeo, and good night indeed.
Juliet. 'Tis almost morning. I would have thee gone-
Juliet. To answer that, I should confess to you.
Juliet. Wash they his wounds with tears? Mine shall be spent,
Juliet. Well, do not swear. Although I joy in thee,
Juliet. Well, thou hast comforted me marvellous much.
Juliet. What devil art thou that dost torment me thus?
Juliet. What man art thou that, thus bescreen'd in night,
Juliet. What must be shall be.
Juliet. What satisfaction canst thou have to-night?
Juliet. What's he that follows there, that would not dance?
Juliet. What's he that now is going out of door?
Juliet. What storm is this that blows so contrary?
Juliet. What villain, madam?
Juliet. Where I have learnt me to repent the sin
Juliet. Where is my mother? Why, she is within.
Juliet. Who is't that calls? It is my lady mother.
Juliet. Wilt thou be gone? It is not yet near day.
Juliet. Yea, noise? Then I'll be brief. O happy dagger!
Juliet. Yet let me weep for such a feeling loss.
Juliet. Yond light is not daylight; I know it, I.
Juliet. You kiss by th' book.
Juliet. [aside] Villain and he be many miles asunder.
Juliet, on Thursday early will I rouse ye.
Juliet, the County stays.
Just in her case!
Just opposite to what thou justly seem'st-
Killing that love which thou hast vow'd to cherish;
[Knock.]
[Knock.]
Lady Cap. Accurs'd, unhappy, wretched, hateful day!
Lady Cap. A crutch, a crutch! Why call you for a sword?
Lady Cap. A fortnight and odd days.
Lady Cap. Alack the day, she's dead, she's dead, she's dead!
Lady Cap. Ay, sir; but she will none, she gives you thanks.
Lady Cap. Ay, you have been a mouse-hunt in your time;
Lady Cap. Enough of this. I pray thee hold thy peace.
Lady Cap. Evermore weeping for your cousin's death?
Lady Cap. Fie, fie! what, are you mad?
Lady Cap. Find thou the means, and I'll find such a man.
Lady Cap. Good night.
Lady Cap. He is a kinsman to the Montague;
Lady Cap. Here comes your father. Tell him so yourself,
Lady Cap. Ho, daughter! are you up?
Lady Cap. Hold, take these keys and fetch more spices, nurse.
Lady Cap. I will, and know her mind early to-morrow;
Lady Cap. Marry, my child, early next Thursday morn
Lady Cap. Marry, that 'marry' is the very theme
Lady Cap. No, not till Thursday. There is time enough.
Lady Cap. Nurse, where's my daughter? Call her forth to me.
Lady Cap. O me, O me! My child, my only life!
Lady Cap. O me! this sight of death is as a bell
Lady Cap. O me! this sight of death is as a bell
Lady Cap. O woful time!
Lady Cap. She's not fourteen.
Lady Cap. So shall you feel the loss, but not the friend
Lady Cap. Speak briefly, can you like of Paris' love?
Lady Cap. Talk not to me, for I'll not speak a word.
Lady Cap. That is because the traitor murderer lives.
Lady Cap. That same villain Romeo.
Lady Cap. The people in the street cry 'Romeo,'
Lady Cap. The people in the street cry 'Romeo,'
Lady Cap. This is the matter- Nurse, give leave awhile,
Lady Cap. Tybalt, my cousin! O my brother's child!
Lady Cap. Verona's summer hath not such a flower.
Lady Cap. We follow thee. [Exit a SERVINGMAN].
Lady Cap. Well, girl, thou weep'st not so much for his death
Lady Cap. Well, think of marriage now. Younger than you,
Lady Cap. Well, well, thou hast a careful father, child;
Lady Cap. We shall be short in our provision.
Lady Cap. We will have vengeance for it, fear thou not.
Lady Cap. What, are you busy, ho? Need you my help?
Lady Cap. What is the matter?
Lady Cap. What noise is here?
Lady Cap. What say you? Can you love the gentleman?
Lady Cap. Why, how now, Juliet?
Lady Cap. You are too hot.
Lady Mont. O, where is Romeo? Saw you him to-day?
Lady Mont. Thou shalt not stir one foot to seek a foe.
[Lays down a knife.]
[Lays him in the tomb.]
Leap to these arms untalk'd of and unseen.
Leave me and do the thing I bid thee do.
Lest in this marriage he should be dishonour'd
Lest that thy love prove likewise variable.
Let me be satisfied, is't good or bad?
Let not the nurse lie with thee in thy chamber.
Let's see for means. O mischief, thou art swift
Let them affright thee. I beseech thee, youth,
Let two more summers wither in their pride
Lies fest'ring in his shroud; where, as they say,
Lies my consent and fair according voice.
Life and these lips have long been separated.
Lifts me above the ground with cheerful thoughts.
Like a poor prisoner in his twisted gyves,
Like a rich jewel in an Ethiop's ear-
Like damned guilty deeds to sinners' minds!
Like death when he shuts up the day of life;
Like powder in a skilless soldier's flask,
Like softest music to attending ears!
Live, and be prosperous; and farewell, good fellow.
Live here in heaven and may look on her;
Lo, here upon thy cheek the stain doth sit
Look, sir, here comes the lady toward my cell.
Look to the bak'd meats, good Angelica;
Look to't, think on't; I do not use to jest.
Look you, she lov'd her kinsman Tybalt dearly,
Lord, she will be a joyful woman.
Love goes toward love as schoolboys from their books;
Love is a smoke rais'd with the fume of sighs;
Lovers can see to do their amorous rites
Lucio and the lively Helena.'
MUSICIANS waiting. SERVINGMEN come forth with napkins.
Madam, good night. Commend me to your daughter.
Madam, if you could find out but a man
Made by the joiner squirrel or old grub,
Maintains such falsehood, then turn tears to fires;
Make haste, I say.
Make haste! The bridegroom he is come already:
Makes my flesh tremble in their different greeting.
Making them women of good carriage.
Mantua. A street.
Many for many virtues excellent,
Marry, and amen. How sound is she asleep!
Marry, go before to field, he'll be your follower!
May be put from her by society.
May do much danger. Friar John, go hence,
May prove a beauteous flow'r when next we meet.
May stand in number, though in reck'ning none.
Meaning to keep her closely at my cell
Meaning to keep her closely at my cell
Mer. A bawd, a bawd, a bawd! So ho!
Mer. A challenge, on my life.
Mer. Alas, poor Romeo, he is already dead! stabb'd with a white
Mer. And but one word with one of us?
Mer. And so did I.
Mer. And, to sink in it, should you burthen love-
Mer. Any man that can write may answer a letter.
Mer. A sail, a sail!
Mer. Ay, ay, a scratch, a scratch. Marry, 'tis enough.
Mer. But I'll be hang'd, sir, if he wear your livery.
Mer. By my heel, I care not.
Mer. Come between us, good Benvolio! My wits faint.
Mer. Come, come, thou art as hot a jack in thy mood as any in
Mer. Come, sir, your passado!
Mer. Consort? What, dost thou make us minstrels? An thou make
Mer. Could you not take some occasion without giving
Mer. Farewell, ancient lady. Farewell,
Mer. God ye good-den, fair gentlewoman.
Mer. Good King of Cats, nothing but one of your nine lives. That I
Mer. Good Peter, to hide her face; for her fan's the fairer face of
Mer. He is wise,
Mer. Help me into some house, Benvolio,
Mer. I am hurt.
Mer. If love be blind, love cannot hit the mark.
Mer. If love be rough with you, be rough with love.
Mer. I mean, sir, in delay
Mer. I will bite thee by the ear for that jest.
Mer. Men's eyes were made to look, and let them gaze.
Mer. More than Prince of Cats, I can tell you. O, he's the
Mer. Nay, I am the very pink of courtesy.
Mer. Nay, I'll conjure too.
Mer. Nay, an there were two such, we should have none shortly, for
Mer. Nay, gentle Romeo, we must have you dance.
Mer. Nay, if our wits run the wild-goose chase, I am done; for thou
Mer. No hare, sir; unless a hare, sir, in a lenten pie, that is
Mer. No, 'tis not so deep as a well, nor so wide as a church door;
Mer. O calm, dishonourable, vile submission!
Mer. O, here's a wit of cheveril, that stretches from an inch
Mer. O, then I see Queen Mab hath been with you.
Mer. O, thou art deceiv'd! I would have made it short; for I was
Mer. Right.
Mer. That dreamers often lie.
Mer. That's as much as to say, such a case as yours constrains a
Mer. The fee simple? O simple!
Mer. The pox of such antic, lisping, affecting fantasticoes- these
Mer. The slip, sir, the slip. Can you not conceive?
Mer. This cannot anger him. 'Twould anger him
Mer. Thou art like one of these fellows that, when he enters the
Mer. Thou desirest me to stop in my tale against the hair.
Mer. Thou hast most kindly hit it.
Mer. Thy wit is a very bitter sweeting; it is a most sharp sauce.
Mer. 'Tis no less, I tell ye; for the bawdy hand of the dial is now
Mer. True, I talk of dreams;
Mer. Tut! dun's the mouse, the constable's own word!
Mer. Well said! Follow me this jest now till thou hast worn out thy
Mer. Where the devil should this Romeo be?
Mer. Why, is not this better now than groaning for love? Now art
Mer. Why, may one ask?
Mer. Why, that same pale hard-hearted wench, that Rosaline,
Mer. Without his roe, like a dried herring. O flesh, flesh, how art
Mer. Yea, is the worst well? Very well took, i' faith! wisely,
Mer. You are a lover. Borrow Cupid's wings
Mercutio and his brother Valentine;
Mercutio's kinsman, noble County Paris!
Mercy but murders, pardoning those that kill.
Methinks I see thee, now thou art below,
Mine uncle Capulet, his wife, and daughters;
Miscarried by my fault, let my old life
Miscarried by my fault, let my old life
Misshapen chaos of well-seeming forms!
Misshapen in the conduct of them both,
Mist-like infold me from the search of eyes.
Mont. Alas, my liege, my wife is dead tonight!
Mont. Alas, my liege, my wife is dead tonight!
Mont. Both by myself and many other friend;
Mont. But I can give thee more;
Mont. I neither know it nor can learn of him
Mont. I would thou wert so happy by thy stay
Mont. Many a morning hath he there been seen,
Mont. Not Romeo, Prince; he was Mercutio's friend;
Mont. O thou untaught! what manners is in this,
Mont. O thou untaught! what manners is in this,
Mont. Thou villain Capulet!- Hold me not, let me go.
Mont. Who set this ancient quarrel new abroach?
Montagues.
More fierce and more inexorable far
More honourable state, more courtship lives
More light, you knaves! and turn the tables up,
More torches here! - Come on then, let's to bed.
Most detestable Death, by thee beguil'd,
Most lamentable day, most woful day
Most miserable hour that e'er time saw
Move them no more by crossing their high will.
Much more than death. Do not say 'banishment.'
Murder'd her kinsman. O, tell me, friar, tell me,
1. Mus. An you re us and fa us, you note us.
1 Mus. Ay, by my troth, the case may be amended.
3. Mus. Faith, I know not what to say.
1. Mus. Faith, we may put up our pipes and be gone.
2. Mus. Hang him, Jack! Come, we'll in here, tarry for the
2. Mus. I say 'silver sound' because musicians sound for silver.
1. Mus. Marry, sir, because silver hath a sweet sound.
1. Mus. No.
1. Mus. Not a dump we! 'Tis no time to play now.
2. Mus. Pray you put up your dagger, and put out your wit.
1. Mus. Then will I give you the serving-creature.
1. Mus. What a pestilent knave is this same?
1. Mus. What will you give us?
1. Mus. Why 'Heart's ease'',
[Music plays, and they dance.]
Must be my convoy in the secret night.
Must climb a bird's nest soon when it is dark.
My back o' t' other side,- ah, my back, my back!
My blood for your rude brawls doth lie a-bleeding;
My bosom's lord sits lightly in his throne,
My bounty is as boundless as the sea,
My child is yet a stranger in the world,
My conceal'd lady to our cancell'd love?
My daughter he hath wedded. I will die
My dear-lov'd cousin, and my dearer lord?
My dismal scene I needs must act alone.
My dreams presage some joyful news at hand.
My fair niece Rosaline and Livia;
My fingers itch. Wife, we scarce thought us blest
My grave is like to be my wedding bed.
My house and welcome on their pleasure stay.
My husband is on earth, my faith in heaven.
My husband lives, that Tybalt would have slain;
My intercession likewise steads my foe.
My life were better ended by their hate
My lips, two blushing pilgrims, ready stand
My lord, I'll tell my lady you will come.
My lord and you were then at Mantua.
My lord, we must entreat the time alone.
My love as deep; the more I give to thee,
My master knows not but I am gone hence,
My name, dear saint, is hateful to myself,
Myself condemned and myself excus'd.
Myself condemned and myself excus'd.
My true-love passion. Therefore pardon me,
My very friend, hath got this mortal hurt
My will to her consent is but a part.
My words would bandy her to my sweet love,
[NURSE calls within.]
[NURSE goes to the curtains.]
Nay, I do bear a brain. But, as I said,
Nay, come, I pray thee speak. Good, good nurse, speak.
Nay, sit, nay, sit, good cousin Capulet,
Need and oppression starveth in thine eyes,
Ne'er saw her match since first the world begun.
Never was seen so black a day as this.
News from Verona! How now, Balthasar?
Nightly shall be to strew, thy grave and weep.
Nightly she sings on yond pomegranate tree.
Night's candles are burnt out, and jocund day
No, No! This shall forbid it. Lie thou there.
No better term than this: thou art a villain.
No faith, no honesty in men; all perjur'd,
None but for some, and yet all different.
Non, ere the sun advance his burning eye
No nightingale. Look, love, what envious streaks
Nor arm, nor face, nor any other part
Nor aught so good but, strain'd from that fair use,
Nor bide th' encounter of assailing eyes,
Nor get a messenger to bring it thee,
Nor no without-book prologue, faintly spoke
Nor ope her lap to saint-seducing gold.
Nor tears nor prayers shall purchase out abuses.
Nor that is not the lark whose notes do beat
Nor what is mine shall never do thee good.
No sudden mean of death, though ne'er so mean,
Not body's death, but body's banishment.
Not half so big as a round little worm
Noting this penury, to myself I said,
Not stepping o'er the bounds of modesty.
Not truly in their hearts, but in their eyes.
Not yet enjoy'd. So tedious is this day
Now I have stain'd the childhood of our joy
Now Romeo is belov'd, and loves again,
Now, Tybalt, take the 'villain' back again
Now, afore God, this reverend holy friar,
No warmth, no breath, shall testify thou livest;
Now, by the stock and honour of my kin,
Now comes the wanton blood up in your cheeks:
Now do you know the reason of this haste.
 Now  fellow, what is there?
Now is the sun upon the highmost hill
Now, nurse, what news? What hast thou there? the cords
Now seeming sweet, convert to bitt'rest gall.
Now, sir, her father counts it dangerous
Now, when the bridegroom in the morning comes
Now will he sit under a medlar tree
Nurse. Ah, mocker! that's the dog's name. R is for the - No; I know
Nurse. Ah sir! ah sir! Well, death's the end of all.
Nurse. Ah, weraday! he's dead, he's dead, he's dead!
Nurse. A man, young lady! lady, such a man
Nurse. An 'a speak anything against me, I'll take him down, an 'a
Nurse. And from my soul too; else beshrew them both.
Nurse. An honour? Were not I thine only nurse,
Nurse. Anon, anon!
Nurse. Ay, a thousand times. [Exit Romeo.] Peter!
Nurse. Ay, ay, the cords. [Throws them down.]
Nurse. Ay, forsooth.
Nurse. By my troth, it is well said. 'For himself to mar,' quoth
Nurse. Even or odd, of all days in the year,
Nurse. Even so lies she,
Nurse. Faith, I can tell her age unto an hour.
Nurse. Faith, here it is.
Nurse. God in heaven bless her!
Nurse. God ye good morrow, gentlemen.
Nurse. Go, girl, seek happy nights to happy days.
Nurse. Good heart, and I faith I will tell her as much. Lord,
Nurse. Go, you cot-quean, go,
Nurse. Have you got leave to go to shrift to-day?
Nurse. Here is a ring she bid me give you, sir.
Nurse. Hie to your chamber. I'll find Romeo
Nurse. His name is Romeo, and a Montague,
Nurse. Honest good fellows, ah, put up, put up!
Nurse. I am aweary, give me leave awhile.
Nurse. If you be he, sir, I desire some confidence with you.
Nurse. I know not.
Nurse. I'll lay fourteen of my teeth-
Nurse. I saw the wound, I saw it with mine eyes,
Nurse. Is it good-den?
Nurse. I speak no treason.
Nurse. Is your man secret? Did you ne'er hear say,
Nurse. It did, it did! alas the day, it did!
Nurse. I will tell her, sir, that you do protest, which, as I take
Nurse. Jesu, what haste! Can you not stay awhile?
Nurse. Look, look! O heavy day!
Nurse. Lord, how my head aches! What a head have I!
Nurse. Madam!
Nurse. Madam, your mother craves a word with you.
Nurse. Marry, I will; and this is wisely done. Exit.
Nurse. Marry, bachelor,
Nurse. Marry, farewell! I Pray you, Sir, what saucy merchant was
Nurse. Marry, that, I think, be young Petruchio.
Nurse. May not one speak?
Nurse. Mistress! what, mistress! Juliet! Fast, I warrant her, she.
Nurse. My fan, Peter.
Nurse. Nay, he's a flower, in faith- a very flower.
Nurse. No less? Nay, bigger! Women grow by men
Nurse. No, truly, sir; not a penny.
Nurse. Now God in heaven bless thee! Hark you, sir.
Nurse. Now, afore God, I am so vexed that every part about me
Nurse. Now, by my maidenhead at twelve year old,
Nurse. O God's Lady dear!
Nurse. O Lord, I could have stay'd here all the night
Nurse. O Tybalt, Tybalt, the best friend I had!
Nurse. O, he is even in my mistress' case,
Nurse. O holy friar, O, tell me, holy friar
Nurse. O lamentable day!
Nurse. O lamentable day!
Nurse. O, she says nothing, sir, but weeps and weeps;
Nurse. Out upon you! What a man are you!
Nurse. O woe? O woful, woful, woful day!
Nurse. Peace, I have done. God mark thee to his grace!
Nurse. Peter!
Nurse. Peter, stay at the gate. [Exit PETER.]
Nurse. Peter, take my fan, and go before, and apace.
Nurse. Romeo can,
Nurse. See where she comes from shrift with merry look.
Nurse. She's dead, deceas'd; she's dead! Alack the day!
Nurse. Then hie you hence to Friar Laurence' cell;
Nurse. There's no trust,
Nurse. The son and heir of old Tiberio.
Nurse. They call for dates and quinces in the pastry.
Nurse. This afternoon, sir? Well, she shall be there.
Nurse. Tybalt is gone, and Romeo banished;
Nurse. Weeping and wailing over Tybalt's corse.
Nurse. Well, sir, my mistress is the sweetest lady. Lord, Lord!
Nurse. Well, you have made a simple choice; you know not how to
Nurse. What?
Nurse!- What should she do here?
Nurse. What's this? what's this?
Nurse! Wife! What, ho! What, Nurse, I say!
Nurse. Will you speak well of him that kill'd your cousin?
Nurse. [Within] Let me come in, and you shall know my errand.
Nurse. Yes, madam. Yet I cannot choose but laugh
Nurse. Your lady mother is coming to your chamber.
Nurse. Your love says, like an honest gentleman, and a courteous,
Nurse. Your mother.
Nurse. You say well.
Nurse. [within] Madam!
Nurse. [within] Madam!
O God, she comes! O honey nurse, what news?
O, I have bought the mansion of a love,
O Prince! O husband! O, the blood is spill'd
O, Romeo, that she were, O that she were
O, an you will have me live, play 'Heart's ease.'
O anything, of nothing first create!
Obey, and go with me; for thou must die.
O, by this count I shall be much in years
O child! O child! my soul, and not my child!
O churl! drunk all, and left no friendly drop
O courteous Tybalt! honest gentleman
O cousin, cousin!
O day! O day! O day! O hateful day!
O dear account! my life is my foe's debt.
O'er courtiers' knees, that dream on cursies straight;
O'ercover'd quite with dead men's rattling bones,
O'er ladies' lips, who straight on kisses dream,
O'er lawyers' fingers, who straight dream on fees;
Of Tybalt deaf to peace, but that he tilts
Of a despised life, clos'd in my breast,
Of all my buried ancestors are pack'd;
Of all the days of the year, upon that day;
Of an old tear that is not wash'd off yet.
Of a poor pothecary, and therewithal
Of breaches, ambuscadoes, Spanish blades,
Of dear import; and the neglecting it
Of death, contagion, and unnatural sleep.
Of disobedient opposition
Of fair demesnes, youthful, and nobly train'd,
Of healths five fadom deep; and then anon
Of her awaking, here untimely lay
Of her awaking, here untimely lay
Of ill-shaped fishes; and about his shelves
Of limping Winter treads, even such delight
Of mortals that fall back to gaze on him
Of my child's love. I think she will be rul'd
Of my dear kinsman! Prince, as thou art true,
Of my dug and felt it bitter, pretty fool,
Of one I danc'd withal.
O friar, the damned use that word in hell;
Of some strange nature, letting it there stand
Of stout Mercutio, and then Tybalt fled;
Of that tongue's utterance, yet I know the sound.
Of this day's journey, and from nine till twelve
Of this sir-reverence love, wherein thou stick'st
Of twenty men, it would dispatch you straight.
Of yonder knight?
O heavy lightness! serious vanity!
O, he's a lovely gentleman!
O, if I wake, shall I not be distraught,
O, in this love, you love your child so ill
O, look! methinks I see my cousin's ghost
O love! O life! not life, but love in death!
O, mickle is the powerful grace that lies
O, much I fear some ill unthrifty thing.
On Lammas Eve at night shall she be fourteen;
On Thursday next be married to this County.
O nature, what hadst thou to do in hell
Once more, on pain of death, all men depart.
One calls within, 'Juliet.'
One desperate grief cures with another's languish.
One fairer than my love? The all-seeing sun
One more, most welcome, makes my number more.
One nickname for her purblind son and heir,
One of our order, to associate me
One pain is lessoned by another's anguish;
One that you love.
One who, to put thee from thy heaviness,
One writ with me in sour misfortune's book!
O, now I would they had chang'd voices too,
O, now be gone! More light and light it grows.
On pain of torture, from those bloody hands
On the fair daughter of rich Capulet;
On the forefinger of an alderman,
On the white wonder of dear Juliet's hand
On this fair corse, and, as the custom is,
O, pardon me for bringing these ill news,
Open the tomb, lay me with Juliet. [PARIS dies.]
Or I shall faint. A plague o' both your houses!
Or I will drag thee on a hurdle thither.
Or am I mad, hearing him talk of Juliet
Or bid me go into a new-made grave
Or by the break of day disguis'd from hence.
Or dedicate his beauty to the sun.
Or else depart. Here all eyes gaze on us.
Or, if I live, is it not very like
Or if he do, it needs must be by stealth.
Or, if his mind be writ, give me his letter.
Or if not so, then here I hit it right-
Or, if sour woe delights in fellowship
Or if thou thinkest I am too quickly won,
Or, if thou wilt not, be but sworn my love,
Or if thou wilt, swear by thy gracious self,
Or if you do not, make the bridal bed
Or ill-beseeming beast in seeming both!
Or in my cell there would she kill herself.
Or in my cell there would she kill herself.
Or manage it to part these men with me.
Or my true heart with treacherous revolt
Or never after look me in the face.
Or shall I come to you at evening mass
Or shall we on without apology?
Or shut me nightly in a charnel house,
Or those eyes shut that make thee answer 'I.'
Or to dispraise my lord with that same tongue
Or walk in thievish ways, or bid me lurk
Or, wanting that, with tears distill'd by moans.
O, she is lame! Love's heralds should be thoughts,
O, she's rich in beauty; only poor
O son, the night before thy wedding day
O, speak again, bright angel! for thou art
O sweet my mother, cast me not away!
O that I were a glove upon that hand,
O that she knew she were!
O, this same thought did but forerun my need,
Our Romeo hath not been in bed to-night.
Our bridal flowers serve for a buried corse;
Our instruments to melancholy bells,
Our solemn hymns to sullen dirges change;
Our wedding cheer to a sad burial feast;
Out on her, hilding!
Out, you green-sickness carrion I out, you baggage!
O weraday that ever I was born!
O, what a beast was I to chide at him!
O, what more favour can I do to thee
O woe, thy canopy is dust and stones
O woful day! O woful day!
[PAGE whistes.]
[PARIS retires.]
[PARIS strews the tomb with flowers.]
PROLOGUE
Page. He came with flowers to strew his lady's grave;
Page. He came with flowers to strew his lady's grave;
Page. O Lord, they fight! I will go call the Watch.
Page. This is the place. There, where the torch doth burn.
Page. [aside] I am almost afraid to stand alone
Pale, pale as ashes, all bedaub'd in blood,
Paris. Beguil'd, divorced, wronged, spited, slain!
Paris. Come you to make confession to this father?
Paris. Do not deny to him that you love me.
Paris. Give me thy torch, boy. Hence, and stand aloof.
Paris. God shield I should disturb devotion!
Paris. Happily met, my lady and my wife!
Paris. Have I thought long to see this morning's face,
Paris. I do defy thy, conjuration
Paris. Immoderately she weeps for Tybalt's death,
Paris. Monday, my lord.
Paris. My father Capulet will have it so,
Paris. My lord, I would that Thursday were tomorrow.
Paris. O, I am slain! If thou be merciful,
Paris. Of honourable reckoning are you both,
Paris. Poor soul, thy face is much abus'd with tears.
Paris. So will ye, I am sure, that you love me.
Paris. Sweet flower, with flowers thy bridal bed I strew.
Paris. That may be must be, love, on Thursday next.
Paris. These times of woe afford no tune to woo.
Paris. This is that banish'd haughty Montague
Paris. Thou wrong'st it more than tears with that report.
Paris. Thy face is mine, and thou hast sland'red it.
Paris. Younger than she are happy mothers made.
Peer'd forth the golden window of the East,
Perchance she cannot meet him. That's not so.
Pet. Pretty! What say You, Hugh Rebeck?
Pet. Pretty too! What say you, James Soundpost?
Pet. You will not then?
Peter. Anon.
Peter. Anon.
Peter. I saw no man use you at his pleasure. If I had, my weapon
Peter. I will then give it you soundly.
Peter. Musicians, O, musicians, 'Heart's ease,' 'Heart's ease'!
Peter. No money, on my faith, but the gleek. I will give you the
Peter. O, I cry you mercy! you are the singer. I will say  for you. It
Peter. O, musicians, because my heart itself plays 'My heart is full
Peter. Then have at you with my wit! I will dry-beat you with an iron
Peter. Then will I lay the serving-creature's dagger on your pate.
Piteous predicament!
Pitiful sight! here lies the County slain;
Pitiful sight! here lies the County slain;
Play'd for a pair of stainless maidenhoods.
Poison, I see, hath been his timeless end.
Poison hath residence, and medicine power;
Poor John. Draw thy tool - Here comes two of the house of
Poor living corse, clos'd in a dead man's tomb!
Poor sacrifices of our enmity!
Prepare her, wife, against this wedding day.
Prick'd from the lazy finger of a maid;
Prick love for pricking, and you beat love down.
Prince. A glooming peace this morning with it brings.
Prince. And for that offence
Prince. Benvolio, who began this bloody fray?
Prince. Come, Montague; for thou art early up
Prince. Come, Montague; for thou art early up
Prince. Give me the letter. I will look on it.
Prince. Give me the letter. I will look on it.
Prince. Look, and thou shalt see.
Prince. Look, and thou shalt see.
Prince. Rebellious subjects, enemies to peace,
Prince. Romeo slew him; he slew Mercutio.
Prince. Seal up the mouth of outrage for a while,
Prince. Seal up the mouth of outrage for a while,
Prince. Search, seek, and know how this foul murder comes.
Prince. Search, seek, and know how this foul murder comes.
Prince. Then say it once what thou dost know in this.
Prince. Then say it once what thou dost know in this.
Prince. This letter doth make good the Friar's words,
Prince. We still have known thee for a holy man.
Prince. We still have known thee for a holy man.
Prince. What fear is this which startles in our ears?
Prince. What fear is this which startles in our ears?
Prince. What misadventure is so early up,
Prince. What misadventure is so early up,
Prince. Where are the vile beginners of this fray?
Prodigious birth of love it is to me
Profaners of this neighbour-stained steel-
Proportion'd as one's thought would wish a man-
'Proud'- and 'I thank you'- and 'I thank you not'-
Proud can I never be of what I hate,
Pursu'd my humour, not Pursuing his,
Put up your swords. You know not what you do.
Raise up the Montagues. Some others search.
Raise up the Montagues. Some others search.
Rather than Paris. These are news indeed!
Read o'er the volume of young Paris' face,
Receive in either by this dear encounter.
Rememb'ring how I love thy company.
Remnants of packthread, and old cakes of roses
Retain that dear perfection which he owes
Retorts it. Romeo he cries aloud,
Return'd my letter back. Then all alone
Return'd my letter back. Then all alone
Revive, look up, or I will die with thee!
Revolts from true birth, stumbling on abuse.
Riddling confession finds but riddling shrift.
Right glad I am he was not at this fray.
Rom. Ay, so I fear; the more is my unrest.
Rom. I warrant thee my man's as true as steel.
Rom. This day's black fate on moe days doth depend;
Romeo!
Romeo?
Romeo. A gentleman, nurse, that loves to hear himself talk and will
Romeo. Ah, Juliet, if the measure of thy joy
Romeo. Alack, there lies more peril in thine eye
Romeo. Alas that love, whose view is muffled still,
Romeo. Alive in triumph, and Mercutio slain?
Romeo. Amen, amen! But come what sorrow can,
Romeo. A most courteous exposition.
Romeo. And I'll still stay, to have thee still forget,
Romeo. And bad'st me bury love.
Romeo. And is it not, then, well serv'd in to a sweet goose?
Romeo. And stay, good nurse, behind the abbey wall.
Romeo. And trust me, love, in my eye so do you.
Romeo. And we mean well, in going to this masque;
Romeo. A right good markman! And she's fair I love.
Romeo. Art thou so bare and full of wretchedness
Romeo. As if that name,
Romeo. A thousand times the worse, to want thy light!
Romeo. A torch for me! Let wantons light of heart
Romeo. Ay, If I know the letters and the language.
Romeo. Ay me! sad hours seem long.
Romeo. Ay, mine own fortune in my misery.
Romeo. Ay, nurse; what of that? Both with an R.
Romeo. Bid a sick man in sadness make his will.
Romeo. Bid her devise
Romeo. But that a joy past joy calls out on me,
Romeo. By a name
Romeo. By love, that first did prompt me to enquire.
Romeo. By the hour of nine.
Romeo. Can I go forward when my heart is here?
Romeo. Come hither, man. I see that thou art poor.
Romeo. Commend me to thy lady.
Romeo. Courage, man. The hurt cannot be much.
Romeo. Do so, and bid my sweet prepare to chide.
Romeo. Draw, Benvolio; beat down their weapons.
Romeo. Farewell!
Romeo. Farewell, farewell! One kiss, and I'll descend.
Romeo. Father, what news? What is the Prince's doom
Romeo. For your broken shin.
Romeo. Gentle Mercutio, put thy rapier up.
Romeo. Give me a torch. I am not for this ambling.
Romeo. Give me that mattock and the wrenching iron.
Romeo. Good heart, at what?
Romeo. Good morrow, father.
Romeo. Good morrow to you both. What counterfeit did I give you?
Romeo. Go to! I say you shall.
Romeo. Ha, banishment? Be merciful, say 'death';
Romeo. Have not saints lips, and holy palmers too?
Romeo. Here's goodly gear!
Romeo. How should they, when that wise men have no eyes?
Romeo. How well my comfort is reviv'd by this!
Romeo. I am too sore enpierced with his shaft
Romeo. I can tell you; but young Romeo will be older when you have
Romeo, I come! this do I drink to thee.
Romeo. I do protest I never injur'd thee,
Romeo. I doubt it not; and all these woes shall serve
Romeo. I dreamt a dream to-night.
Romeo. If I may trust the flattering truth of sleep
Romeo. I fear, too early; for my mind misgives
Romeo. If my heart's dear love-
Romeo. I have night's cloak to hide me from their sight;
Romeo. I'll go along, no such sight to be shown,
Romeo. I'll tell thee ere thou ask it me again.
Romeo. I must indeed; and therefore came I hither.
Romeo. In bed asleep, while they do dream things true.
Romeo. Indeed I should have ask'd you that before.
Romeo. In faith, I will. Let me peruse this face.
Romeo. I pay thy poverty and not thy will.
Romeo. I pray thee chide not. She whom I love now
Romeo. Is it e'en so? Then I defy you, stars!
Romeo. Is love a tender thing? It is too rough,
Romeo. Is she a Capulet?
Romeo. Is the day so young?
Romeo. I stretch it out for that word 'broad,' which, added to the
Romeo. I take thee at thy word.
Romeo. I thought all for the best.
Romeo. It is my soul that calls upon my name.
Romeo. It was the lark, the herald of the morn;
Romeo. I will follow you.
Romeo. I would I were thy bird.
Romeo. Lady, by yonder blessed moon I swear,
Romeo. Let me be ta'en, let me be put to death.
Romeo. Let me stand here till thou remember it.
Romeo. Meaning, to cursy.
Romeo. More light and light- more dark and dark our woes!
Romeo. My dear?
Romeo. Nay, good goose, bite not!
Romeo. Nay, that's not so.
Romeo. Neither, fair saint, if either thee dislike.
Romeo. No matter. Get thee gone
Romeo. Not I, believe me. You have dancing shoes
Romeo. Not I; unless the breath of heartsick groans,
Romeo. Not having that which having makes them short.
Romeo. Not mad, but bound more than a madman is;
Romeo. Nurse.
Romeo. Nurse, commend me to thy lady and mistress. I protest unto thee-
Romeo. O, I am fortune's fool!
Romeo. O blessed, blessed night! I am afeard,
Romeo. O, let us hence! I stand on sudden haste.
Romeo. One, gentlewoman, that God hath made for himself to mar.
Romeo! O, pale! Who else? What, Paris too?
Romeo. O, she doth teach the torches to burn bright!
Romeo. O single-sold jest, solely singular for the singleness!
Romeo. O, teach me how I should forget to think!
Romeo. O, then, dear saint, let lips do what hands do!
Romeo. O, thou wilt speak again of banishment.
Romeo. Out-
Romeo. Out of her favour where I am in love.
Romeo. O, wilt thou leave me so unsatisfied?
Romeo. Pardon, good Mercutio. My business was great, and in such a
Romeo. Peace, peace, Mercutio, peace!
Romeo. Pink for flower.
Romeo. She hath, and in that sparing makes huge waste;
Romeo. She speaks.
Romeo. Sin from my lips? O trespass sweetly urg'd!
Romeo. Sleep dwell upon thine eyes, peace in thy breast!
Romeo. So shalt thou show me friendship. Take thou that.
Romeo. So thrive my soul-
Romeo. Spakest thou of Juliet? How is it with her?
Romeo. Stay, fellow; I can read. [He reads the paper.]
Romeo. Swits and spurs, swits and spurs! or I'll cry a match.
Romeo. That last is true-the sweeter rest was mine.
Romeo. Then move not while my prayer's effect I take.
Romeo. Then plainly know my heart's dear love is set
Romeo. There is no world without Verona walls,
Romeo. There is thy gold- worse poison to men's souls,
Romeo. Th' exchange of thy love's faithful vow for mine.
Romeo. This gentleman, the Prince's near ally,
Romeo. This shall determine that.
Romeo. Thou canst not speak of that thou dost not feel.
Romeo. Thou chid'st me oft for loving Rosaline.
Romeo. Thou detestable maw, thou womb of death,
Romeo. Thou wast never with me for anything when thou wast not there
Romeo. 'Tis the way
Romeo. 'Tis torture, and not mercy. Heaven is here,
Romeo. Tush, thou art deceiv'd.
Romeo. Tut! I have lost myself; I am not here:
Romeo. Tybalt, the reason that I have to love thee
Romeo. Well, in that hit you miss. She'll not be hit
Romeo. Well, what was yours?
Romeo. What hast thou found?
Romeo. What is her mother?
Romeo. What less than doomsday is the Prince's doom?
Romeo. What say'st thou, my dear nurse?
Romeo. What, shall I groan and tell thee?
Romeo. What shall I swear by?
Romeo. What, shall this speech be spoke for our excuse?
Romeo. What wilt thou tell her, nurse? Thou dost not mark me.
Romeo. When the devout religion of mine eye
Romeo. Whither?
Romeo. Whose house?
Romeo. Why, such is love's transgression.
Romeo. Why, then is my pump well-flower'd.
Romeo. Wilt thou provoke me? Then have at thee, boy!
Romeo. With Rosaline, my ghostly father? No.
Romeo. With love's light wings did I o'erperch these walls;
Romeo. Would'st thou withdraw it? For what purpose, love?
Romeo. Yet 'banished'? Hang up philosophy!
Romeo. Your plantain leaf is excellent for that.
Romeo. [aside] Shall I hear more, or shall I speak at this?
Romeo. [ coming forward.]
Romeo, good night. I'll to my truckle-bed;
Romeo! humours! madman! passion! lover!
Romeo is banish'd; and all the world to nothing
'Romeo is banished'- to speak that word
Romeo is coming.
Romeo opens the tomb.
Romeo's a dishclout to him. An eagle, madam,
Romeo slew Tybalt; Romeo must not live.
Romeo that kill'd him, he is banished.
Romeo, that spoke him fair, bid him bethink
Romeo, there dead, was husband to that Juliet;
Romeo, there dead, was husband to that Juliet;
Romeo. [to JULIET].
Romeo. [to a SERVINGMAN] 
Romeo, will you come to your father's? We'll to dinner thither.
Run to my study.- By-and-by!- God's will,
SCENE I.
SCENE I.
 SCENE I.
SCENE I.
SCENE I.
SCENE II.
SCENE II.
SCENE II.
SCENE II.
SCENE II.
SCENE III.
SCENE III.
SCENE III.
SCENE III.
SCENE III.
SCENE IV.
SCENE IV.
SCENE IV.
SCENE IV.
SCENE V.
SCENE V.
SCENE V.
SCENE V.
SCENE VI.
Said he not so? or did I dream it so?
Sailing in this salt flood; the winds, thy sighs,
Samp. A dog of that house shall move me to stand. I will take the
Samp. A dog of the house of Montague moves me.
Samp. Ay, the heads of the maids, or their maidenheads.
Samp. Draw, if you be men. Gregory, remember thy swashing blow.
Samp. Fear me not.
Samp. Gregory, on my word, we'll not carry coals.
Samp. I do bite my thumb, sir.
Samp. If you do, sir, am for you. I serve as good a man as you.
Samp. I mean, an we be in choler, we'll draw.
Samp. I strike quickly, being moved.
Samp. Let us take the law of our sides; let them begin.
Samp. Me they shall feel while I am able to stand; and 'tis known I
Samp. My naked weapon is out. Quarrel! I will back thee.
Samp. Nay, as they dare. I will bite my thumb at them; which is
Samp. No, sir, I do not bite my thumb at you, sir; but I bite my
Samp. 'Tis all one. I will show myself a tyrant. When I have fought
Samp. 'Tis true; and therefore women, being the weaker vessels, are
Samp. Well, sir.
Samp. Yes, better, sir.
Samp. [aside to GREGORY] Is the law of our side if I say ay?
Say either, and I'll stay the circumstance.
Scaring the ladies like a crowkeeper;
Seal'd up the doors, and would not let us forth,
Second Ser. Ay, boy, ready.
Second Ser. When good manners shall lie all in one or two men's hands,
See how she leans her cheek upon her hand!
Seeking out Romeo, that did spit his body
See thou deliver it to my lord and father.
See what a scourge is laid upon your hate,
Ser. Find them out whose names are written here? It is written
Ser. God gi' go-den. I pray, sir, can you read?
2 Ser. I have a head, sir, that will find out logs
Ser. I know not, sir.
Ser. Marry, sir, 'tis an ill cook that cannot lick his own
Ser. My master's.
Ser. Now I'll tell you without asking. My master is the great rich
Ser. Perhaps you have learned it without book. But I pray, can you
1 Ser. Things for the cook, sir; but I know not what.
Ser. To supper, to our house.
Ser. Up.
Ser. Ye say honestly. Rest you merry!
Ser. You shall have none ill, sir; for I'll try if they can lick
Sev. Madam, the guests are come, supper serv'd up, you call'd, my
Shake, quoth the dovehouse! 'Twas no need, I trow,
Shall I be married then to-morrow morning?
Shall I not then be stifled in the vault,
Shall I send to thee?
Shall Romeo bear thee hence to Mantua.
Shall Romeo by my letters know our drift;
Shall be the label to another deed,
Shall bitterly begin his fearful date
Shall give him such an unaccustom'd dram
Shall happily make thee there a joyful bride.
Shall have the chinks.
Shall keep his native progress, but surcease;
Shall play the empire, arbitrating that
Shall, stiff and stark and cold, appear like death;
Shalt with him hence.
Shame come to Romeo!
Sharp misery had worn him to the bones;
She I'll swear hath corns. Am I come near ye now?
She could have run and waddled all about;
[She falls upon her bed within the curtains.]
[She goeth down from the window.]
She hath forsworn to love, and in that vow
She hath not seen the change of fourteen years;
She is not fourteen. How long is it now
She is the fairies' midwife, and she comes
She is the hopeful lady of my earth.
She is too fair, too wise, wisely too fair,
[She kneels down.]
[She kneels down.]
She shall be married to this noble earl.
She's not well married that lives married long,
She speaks, yet she says nothing. What of that?
[She stabs herself and falls].
She wakes; and I entreated her come forth
She wakes; and I entreated her come forth
She was too good for me. But, as I said,
She will beshrew me much that Romeo
She will not stay the siege of loving terms,
She would be as swift in motion as a ball;
Shot from the deadly level of a gun,
Should be so tyrannous and rough in proof!
Should in the farthest East bean to draw
Should without eyes see pathways to his will!
Show a fair presence and put off these frowns,
Show me a mistress that is passing fair,
Shuts up his windows, locks fair daylight
Shut up in Prison, kept without my food,
'Signior Martino and his wife and daughters;
Signior Placentio and His lovely nieces;
Signior Valentio and His cousin Tybalt;
Since arm from arm that voice doth us affray,
Since birth and heaven and earth, all three do meet
Since this same wayward girl is so reclaim'd.
Since you did leave it for my office, sir.
- Sirrah, fetch drier logs!
Sirrah, go hire me twenty cunning cooks.
Sirrah, what made your master in this place?
Sirrah, what made your master in this place?
Sitting in the sun under the dovehouse wall.
Sleep for a week; for the next night, I warrant,
[Snatching ROMEO'S dagger.]
So Romeo would, were he not Romeo call'd,
So early waking- what with loathsome smells,
So early walking did I see your son.
So fairly bound? O, that deceit should dwell
So far from sounding and discovery,
So fearful were they of infection.
Sojourn in Mantua. I'll find out your man,
Sole monarch of the universal earth.
So loving-jealous of his liberty.
So many thousand times? Go, counsellor!
Some 'Juliet,' and some 'Paris'; and all run,
Some 'Juliet,' and some 'Paris'; and all run,
Some aqua-vitae, ho! My lord! my lady!
Some comfort, nurse.
Some consequence, yet hanging in the stars,
Some five-and-twenty years, and then we mask'd.
Some means to come to shrift this afternoon;
Some misadventure.
Some say the lark and loathed toad chang'd eyes;
Some say the lark makes sweet division;
Some shall be pardon'd, and some punished;
Sometime she gallops o'er a courtier's nose,
Sometimes she driveth o'er a soldier's neck,
Some twenty of them fought in this black strife,
Some word there was, worser than Tybalt's death,
Soon sleep in quiet. O, how my heart abhors
So please you, let me now be left alone,
So shall no foot upon the churchyard tread
So shall you share all that he doth possess,
So shows a snowy dove trooping with crows
So soon forsaken? Young men's love then lies
So soon to bid good morrow to thy bed.
So stakes me to the ground I cannot move.
So stumblest on my counsel?
So that my speed to Mantua there was stay'd.
So thou wilt woo; but else, not for the world.
So worthy a gentleman to be her bridegroom?
Spare not for cost.
Speak but one rhyme, and I am satisfied!
Speak, nephew, were you by when it began?
Speak not, reply not, do not answer me!
Speak to my gossip Venus one fair word,
Spread thy close curtain, love-performing night,
Stand not amaz'd. The Prince will doom thee death
Stands tiptoe on the misty mountain tops.
Stand up, stand up! Stand, an you be a man.
Stay but a little, I will come again. [Exit JULIET above.]
Staying for thine to keep him company.
Stay not, be gone. Live, and hereafter say
Stay not to question, for the Watch is coming.
Still blush, as thinking their own kisses sin;
Still-waking sleep, that is not what it is
Stop thy unhallowed toil, vile Montague!
Straining harsh discords and unpleasing sharps.
(Strange dream that gives a dead man leave to think!)
Stuff'd, as they say, with honourable parts,
Subtilly hath minist'red to have me dead,
Such as I love; and you among the store,
Such as would please. 'Tis gone, 'tis gone, 'tis gone!
Such comfort as do lusty young men feel
Supper is done, and we shall come too late.
Sups the fair Rosaline whom thou so lov'st;
Susan and she (God rest all Christian souls!)
Suspecting that we both were in a house
Sweet, sweet, Sweet nurse, tell me, what says my love?
THE END
THE END
THE PROLOGUE
Take all myself.
Take heed, take heed, for such die miserable.
Take him and cut him out in little stars,
Take it in what sense thou wilt.
Take our good meaning, for our judgment sits
Take thou some new infection to thy eye,
Take thou this vial, being then in bed,
Take up those cords. Poor ropes, you are beguil'd,
Taking the measure of an unmade grave.
Taking thy part, hath rush'd aside the law,
Temp'ring extremities with extreme sweet.
Than death prorogued, wanting of thy love.
Than empty tigers or the roaring sea.
Thank me no thankings, nor proud me no prouds,
Than the death-darting eye of cockatrice.
Than these poor compounds that thou mayst not sell.
Than this of Juliet and her Romeo.
Than those that have more cunning to be strange.
Than thou went'st forth in lamentation.
Than twenty of their swords! Look thou but sweet,
Than with that hand that cut thy youth in twain
Than your consent gives strength to make it fly.
That God had lent us but this only child;
That I have worn a visor and could tell
That I might touch that cheek!
That I must love a loathed enemy.
That I reviv'd and was an emperor.
That I shall say good night till it be morrow.
That I will show you shining at this feast,
That I yet know not?
That Romeo bid thee fetch?
That Romeo should, upon receipt thereof,
That after-hours with sorrow chide us not!
That all the world will be in love with night
That almost freezes up the heat of life.
That 'banished,' that one word 'banished,'
That birds would sing and think it were not night.
That book in many's eyes doth share the glory,
That calls our person from our morning rest?
That calls our person from our morning rest?
That cop'st with death himself to scape from it;
That ever I should live to see thee dead!
That ever ever I did yet behold!
That fair for which love groan'd for and would die,
That gallant spirit hath aspir'd the clouds,
That heaven finds means to kill your joys with love!
That he dares ne'er come back to challenge you;
That he shall soon keep Tybalt company;
That he should hither come as this dire night
That he should hither come as this dire night
That idles in the wanton summer air,
That in gold clasps locks in the golden story;
That in thy likeness thou appear to us!
That is renown'd for faith? Be fickle, Fortune,
That late thou gavest me; for Mercutio's soul
That lets it hop a little from her hand,
That living mortals, hearing them, run mad-
That may convey my greetings, love, to thee.
That monthly changes in her circled orb,
That murd'red me. I would forget it fain;
That murd'red my love's cousin- with which grief
That one short minute gives me in her sight.
That pierc'd the fearful hollow of thine ear.
That plats the manes of horses in the night
That presses them and learns them first to bear,
That quench the fire of your pernicious rage
That runaway eyes may wink, and Romeo
That's by me wounded. Both our remedies
That sees into the bottom of my grief?
That shall she, marry; I remember it well.
That she do give her sorrow so much sway,
That slew thy kinsman, brave Mercutio.
That the life-weary taker mall fall dead,
That thou consent to marry us to-day.
That thou expects not nor I look'd not for.
That thou hast done me; therefore turn and draw.
That thou her maid art far more fair than she.
That tips with silver all these fruit-tree tops-
That unsubstantial Death is amorous,
That villain cousin would have kill'd my husband.
That warns my old age to a sepulchre.
That warns my old age to a sepulchre.
That we have had no time to move our daughter.
That we may call it early by-and-by.
That were some spite; my invocation
That westward rooteth from the city's side,
That, when she dies, with beauty dies her store.
That whiles Verona by that name is known,
That you are now a maid. Thus then in brief:
That you run mad, seeing that she is well.
That you shall all repent the loss of mine.
That you shall rest but little. God forgive me!
The County Paris, at Saint Peter's Church,
The County Paris hath set up his rest
The County will be here with music straight,
The ape is dead, and I must conjure him.
The boy gives warning something doth approach.
The brightness of her cheek would shame those stars
The citizens are up, and Tybalt slain.
The cover, of the wings of grasshoppers;
The curfew bell hath rung, 'tis three o'clock.
The dashing rocks thy seasick weary bark!
The day is broke; be wary, look about. [Exit.]
The day is hot, the Capulets abroad.
The day to cheer and night's dank dew to dry,
The doors of breath, seal with a righteous kiss
The earth hath swallowed all my hopes but she;
The earth that's nature's mother is her tomb.
Thee here in dark to be his paramour?
The excuse that thou dost make in this delay
The fearful passage of their death-mark'd love,
The fiery Tybalt, with his sword prepar'd;
The fish lives in the sea, and 'tis much pride
The form of death. Meantime I writ to Romeo
The form of death. Meantime I writ to Romeo
The gallant, young, and noble gentleman,
The game was ne'er so fair, and I am done.
The hateful mansion.
The heavens do low'r upon you for some ill;
The horrible conceit of death and night,
Their course of love, the tidings of her death;
The lady widow of Vitruvio;
The law, that threat'ned death, becomes thy friend
The letter was not nice, but full of charge,
The life of Tybalt.
The measure done, I'll watch her place of stand
The more I have, for both are infinite.
The most you sought was her promotion,
Then, as the manner of our country is,
Then be not poor, but break it and take this.
Then, dreadful trumpet, sound the general doom!
Then dreams he of another benefice.
Then gave I her - so tutored by my art -
Then gave I her - so tutored by my art -
Then is it likely thou wilt undertake
Then love-devouring death do what he dare-
Then mightst thou speak, then mightst thou tear thy hair,
Then music with her silver sound'-
'Then music with her silver sound
The noble Paris and true Romeo dead.
The noble Paris and true Romeo dead.
Then, since the case so stands as now it doth,
Then weep no more. I'll send to one in Mantua,
The obsequies that I for thee will keep
The only son of your great enemy.
The orchard walls are high and hard to climb,
The other did not so.
The precious treasure of his eyesight lost.
The pretty wretch left crying, and said 'Ay.'
There art thou happy. Tybalt would kill thee,
Therefore be patient, take no note of him.
Therefore do nimble-pinion'd doves draw Love,
Therefore farewell. I see thou knowest me not.
Therefore have done. Some grief shows much of love;
Therefore, if thou art moved, thou runn'st away.
Therefore love moderately: long love doth so;
Therefore, out of thy long-experienc'd time,
Therefore stay yet; thou need'st not to be gone.
Therefore thy earliness doth me assure
Therefore thy kinsmen are no let to me.
Therefore use none. Let Romeo hence in haste,
Therefore we'll have some half a dozen friends,
There is no end, no limit, measure, bound,
There lies the man, slain by young Romeo,
There shall no figure at such rate be set
There stays a husband to make you a wife.
The roses in thy lips and cheeks shall fade
These dead men's tombs.
These dead men's tombs.
These griefs, these woes, these sorrows make me old.
These happy masks that kiss fair ladies' brows,
The shady curtains from Aurora's bed,
The stony entrance of this sepulchre?
The sun for sorrow will not show his head.
The sun not yet thy sighs from heaven clears,
The time and my intents are savage-wild,
The unlucky manage of this fatal brawl.
The unreasonable fury of a beast.
The valiant Paris seeks you for his love.
The vaulty heaven so high above our heads.
The which if you with patient ears attend,
The world affords no law to make thee rich;
The world is not thy friend, nor the world's law;
They are all forth; well, I will walk myself
They are but beggars that can count their worth;
They are free men, but I am banished.
[They fight.]
[They fight.]
[They fight.]
[They fight.]
[They fight. TYBALT falls.]
They have made worms' meat of me. I have it,
They'll be in scarlet straight at any news.
[They march about the stage and exeunt.]
They pray; grant thou, lest faith turn to despair.
[They retire behind].
They say Jove laughs. O gentle Romeo,
[They whisper in his ear.]
Things that, to hear them told, have made me tremble-
Think true love acted simple modesty.
This bud of love, by summer's ripening breath,
This but begins the woe others must end.
This dagger hath mista'en, for, lo, his house
This dagger hath mista'en, for, lo, his house
This doth not so, for she divideth us.
This field-bed is too cold for me to sleep.
This holy shrine, the gentle fine is this:
This is as't should be. Let me see the County.
This is dear mercy, and thou seest it not.
This is my daughter's jointure, for no more
This is not Romeo, he's some other where.
This is she-
This is the hag, when maids lie on their backs,
This is the truth, or let Benvolio die.
This is thy sheath; there rust, and let me die.
This letter he early bid me give his father,
This letter he early bid me give his father,
This love feel I, that feel no love in this.
This may flies do, when I from this must fly;
This neighbour air, and let rich music's tongue
This night I hold an old accustom'd feast,
This night you shall behold him at our feast.
This precious book of love, this unbound lover,
This torture should be roar'd in dismal hell.
This trick may chance to scathe you. I know what.
This vault a feasting presence full of light.
Thou and my bosom henceforth shall be twain.
Thou and these woes were all for Rosaline.
Thou art not conquer'd. Beauty's ensign yet
Thou art thyself, though not a Montague.
Thou art uprous'd with some distemp'rature;
Thou counterfeit'st a bark, a sea, a wind:
Thou cut'st my head off with a golden axe
Thou desperate pilot, now at once run on
Though heaven cannot. O Romeo, Romeo!
Though news be sad, yet tell them merrily;
Thou hast amaz'd me. By my holy order,
Thou hast the strength of will to slay thyself,
Thou knowest my daughter's of a pretty age.
Thou knowest my lodging. Get me ink and paper
Thou mayst prove false. At lovers' perjuries,
Thou pout'st upon thy fortune and thy love.
Thou shalt be borne to that same ancient vault
Thou shalt be loggerhead! [Exit 2 Servingman.]
Thou shalt continue two-and-forty hours,
Thou sober-suited matron, all in black,
Thou talk'st of nothing.
Thou wast the prettiest babe that e'er I nurs'd.
Thou wilt be taken.- Stay awhile!- Stand up; [Knock.]
Thou wilt fall backward when thou comest to age;
Thou wilt fall backward when thou hast more wit;
Thou wilt quarrel with a man for cracking nuts, having no other
Three civil brawls, bred of an airy word
Through fair Verona; find those persons out
Through lovers' brains, and then they dream of love;
Throw your mistempered weapons to the ground
Thursday is near; lay hand on heart, advise:
Thursday let it be, a Thursday, tell her
Thus I enforce thy rotten jaws to open,
Thus from my lips, by thine my sin is purg'd. [He Kisses her.]
Thy beauty hath made me effeminate
Thy dear love sworn but hollow perjury,
Thy drugs are quick. Thus with a kiss I die. [He falls.]
Thy father, or thy mother, nay, or both,
Thy fault our law calls death; but the kind Prince,
Thy husband in thy bosom there lies dead;
Thy lips are warm!
Thy love did read by rote, that could not spell.
Thy noble shape is but a form of wax
Thy old groans ring yet in mine ancient ears.
Thy purpose marriage, send me word to-morrow,
Thy tears are womanish, thy wild acts denote
Thy tempest-tossed body. How now, wife?
Thy wit, that ornament to shape and love,
Tickle the senseless rushes with their heels;
Tickling a parson's nose as 'a lies asleep,
Ties up my tongue and will not let me speak.
Till Holy Church incorporate two in one.
Till I conveniently could send to Romeo.
Till I conveniently could send to Romeo.
Till she had laid it and conjur'd it down.
Till the Prince came, who parted either part.
Till then, adieu, and keep this holy kiss. [Exit.]
Till thou shalt know the reason of my love;
Till we can clear these ambiguities
Till we can clear these ambiguities
Time out o' mind the fairies' coachmakers.
'Tis but the pale reflex of Cynthia's brow;
'Tis now near night.
'Tis since the earthquake now eleven years;
'Tis since the nuptial of Lucentio,
'Tis very late; she'll not come down to-night.
To County Paris. Then comes she to me
To County Paris. Then comes she to me
To County Paris, to prepare him up
To Juliet's grave; for there must I use thee.
To Lammastide?
To Mantua, with my letters to thy lord.
To an impatient child that hath new robes
To answer 'I'll not wed, I cannot love;
To bear a poison, I would temper it-;
To beautify him only lacks a cover.
To be a virtuous and well-govern'd youth.
To be consorted with the humorous night.
To beg your pardon. Pardon, I beseech you!
To be to thee this night a torchbearer
To bid me trudge.
To blaze your marriage, reconcile your friends,
To blazon it, then sweeten with thy breath
To breathe such vows as lovers use to swear,
To call hers (exquisite) in question more.
To catch my death with jauncing up and down!
To cease thy suit and leave me to my grief.
To comfort thee, though thou art banished.
To comfort you. I wot well where he is.
To cross my obsequies and true love's rite?
To enter in the thoughts of desperate men!
To fetch a ladder, by the which your love
To fleer and scorn at our solemnity?
To follow this fair corse unto her grave.
Together with the terror of the place-
To go with Paris to Saint Peter's Church,
To grubs and eyeless skulls? As I discern,
To have her match'd; and having now provided
To hear good counsel. O, what learning is!
To hear him nam'd and cannot come to him,
To hear true shrift. Come, madam, let's away.
To help me after? I will kiss thy lips.
To help me sort such needful ornaments
To help to take her from her borrowed grave,
To help to take her from her borrowed grave,
To know our farther pleasure in this case,
To lay one in, another out to have.
To lie discolour'd by this place of peace?
To live an unstain'd wife to my sweet love.
To lure this tassel-gentle back again!
To make confession and to be absolv'd.
To make me die with a restorative. [She kisses him.]
To mangle me with that word 'banished'?
To marry Paris. Wednesday is to-morrow.
To meet her new beloved anywhere;
To merit bliss by making me despair.
Tomorrow night look that thou lie alone;
Tomorrow will I send.
To move the heavens to smile upon my state,
To murther, murther our solemnity?
To-night she's mew'd up to her heaviness.
Too early seen unknown, and known too late!
Too flattering-sweet to be substantial.
Too great oppression for a tender thing.
To old Freetown, our common judgment place.
Too like the lightning, which doth cease to be
Too rude, too boist'rous, and it pricks like thorn.
Too swift arrives as tardy as too slow.
To paly ashes, thy eyes' windows fall
To press before thy father to a grave?
To press before thy father to a grave?
To prison, eyes; ne'er look on liberty!
To raise a spirit in his mistress' circle
To rid her from this second marriage,
To rid her from this second marriage,
Torments him so that he will sure run mad.
To rouse thee from thy bed, there art thou dead.
To say to me that thou art out of breath?
To scorn at our solemnity this night.
To season love, that of it doth not taste!
To see it tetchy and fall out with the dug!
'To seek him here that means not to be found.
To see now how a jest shall come about!
To see thy son and heir more early down.
To see thy son and heir more early down.
To smooth that rough touch with a tender kiss.
To soar with his light feathers; and so bound
To stop the inundation of her tears,
To strike him dead I hold it not a sin.
To such a greeting. Villain am I none.
To sunder his that was thine enemy?
To the dead bodies. I will apprehend him.
To think it should leave crying and say 'Ay.'
To think it was so? O, give me thy hand,
To this same place, to this same monument.
To this same place, to this same monument.
To turn your households' rancour to pure love.
To twinkle in their spheres till they return.
Towards Phoebus' lodging! Such a wagoner
Towards him I made; but he was ware of me
To whose foul mouth no healthsome air breathes in,
To wield old partisans, in hands as old,
To wreak the love I bore my cousin
To you and your behests, and am enjoin'd
Transparent heretics, be burnt for liars!
Trust to't. Bethink you. I'll not be forsworn.
Turn back, dull earth, and find thy centre out.
Turn from their office to black funeral-
Turn giddy, and be holp by backward turning;
Turning his face to the dew-dropping South.
Turn thee Benvolio! look upon thy death.
Turn to another, this shall slay them both.
'Twixt my extremes and me this bloody knife
Two households, both alike in dignity,
Two may keep counsel, putting one away?
Two of the fairest stars in all the heaven,
Two such opposed kings encamp them still
Tyb. Boy, this shall not excuse the injuries
Tyb. Follow me close, for I will speak to them.
Tyb. I am for you. [He draws.]
Tyb. It fits when such a villain is a guest.
Tyb. Mercutio, thou consortest with Romeo.
Tyb. Patience perforce with wilful choler meeting
Tyb. Romeo, the love I bear thee can afford
Tyb. This, by his voice, should be a Montague.
Tyb. Thou, wretched boy, that didst consort him here,
Tyb. 'Tis he, that villain Romeo.
Tyb. Uncle, this is a Montague, our foe;
Tyb. Well, peace be with you, sir. Here comes my man.
Tyb. What, art thou drawn among these heartless hinds?
Tyb. What, drawn, and talk of peace? I hate the word
Tyb. What wouldst thou have with me?
Tyb. Why, uncle, 'tis a shame.
Tyb. You shall find me apt enough to that, sir, an you will give me
Tybalt, Mercutio, the Prince expressly hath
'Tybalt is dead, and Romeo- banished.'
Tybalt, liest thou there in thy bloody sheet?
Tybalt, that murtherer, which way ran he?
Tybalt under Romeo's arm thrusts Mercutio in.
Tybalt, you ratcatcher, will you walk?
Uncomfortable time, why cam'st thou now
Under love's heavy burthen do I sink.
Under yond yew tree lay thee all along,
Uneven is the course; I like it not.
Unfold the imagin'd happiness that both
Unless good counsel may the cause remove.
Unless philosophy can make a Juliet,
Unless that husband send it me from heaven
Unless thou tell me how I may prevent it.
Unplagu'd with corns will have a bout with you.
Unseemly woman in a seeming man!
Unto my cell.
Unto the rigour of severest law.
Unto the rigour of severest law.
Unto the white-upturned wond'ring eyes
Unwieldy, slow, heavy and pale as lead.
Unworthy as she is, that we have wrought
Upon a rapier's point. Stay, Tybalt, stay!
Upon his body that hath slaughter'd him.
Upon his brow shame is asham'd to sit;
Upon so soft a subject as myself!
Upon the sweetest flower of all the field.
Up to the ears. Come, we burn daylight, ho!
Utter your gravity o'er a gossip's bowl,
Verona. A churchyard; in it the monument of the CAPULETS.
Verona. A public place.
Verona. CAPULET'S orchard.
Verona. FRIAR LAURENCE'S cell.
Vile earth, to earth resign; end motion here,
Virtue itself turns vice, being misapplied,
Waking or sleeping, still my care hath been
Warm and new kill'd.
Warm and new kill'd.
Was Tybalt's doomsday, whose untimely death
Was Tybalt's doomsday, whose untimely death
Was ever book containing such vile matter
Was stay'd by accident, and yesternight
Was stay'd by accident, and yesternight
Was that my father that went hence so fast?
Was woe enough, if it had ended there;
1. Watchman. A great suspicion! Stay the friar too.
1. Watchman. A great suspicion! Stay the friar too.
1. Watchman. Here is a friar, and slaughter'd Romeo's man,
1. Watchman. Here is a friar, and slaughter'd Romeo's man,
3. Watchman. Here is a friar that trembles, sighs, and weeps.
3. Watchman. Here is a friar that trembles, sighs, and weeps.
2. Watchman. Here's Romeo's man. We found him in the churchyard.
2. Watchman. Here's Romeo's man. We found him in the churchyard.
1. Watchman. Hold him in safety till the Prince come hither.
1. Watchman. Hold him in safety till the Prince come hither.
1. Watchman. Sovereign, here lies the County Paris slain;
1. Watchman. Sovereign, here lies the County Paris slain;
1 Watchman. 'the ground is bloody. Search about the churchyard.
1 Watchman. 'the ground is bloody. Search about the churchyard.
Watchman. [within.] Lead, boy. Which way?
We are undone, lady, we are undone!
We cannot without circumstance descry.
We cannot without circumstance descry.
We have a trifling foolish banquet towards.
Welcome from Mantua. What says Romeo?
Welcome, gentlemen! I have seen the day
Well, Juliet, I will lie with thee to-night.
We'll have no Cupid hoodwink'd with a scarf,
We'll keep no great ado- a friend or two;
We'll measure them a measure, and be gone.
Well said, my hearts!- You are a princox- go!
We met, we woo'd, and made exchange of vow,
We must talk in secret. Nurse, come back again;
Were in a mask?
Were of an age. Well, Susan is with God;
Were thinly scattered, to make up a show.
Wert thou as young as I, Juliet thy love,
We see the ground whereon these woes do lie,
We see the ground whereon these woes do lie,
We shall be much unfurnish'd for this time.
We sucking on her natural bosom find;
We took this mattock and this spade from him
We took this mattock and this spade from him
We waste our lights in vain, like lamps by day.
We would as willingly give cure as know.
What I have spoke; but farewell compliment!
What are they, I beseech your ladyship?
What curious eye doth quote deformities?
What cursed foot wanders this way to-night
What doth her beauty serve but as a note
What, dress'd, and in your clothes, and down again?
What early tongue so sweet saluteth me?
Whate'er thou hearest or seest, stand all aloof
What further woe conspires against mine age?
What further woe conspires against mine age?
What, goodman boy? I say he shall. Go to!
What, have you din'd at home?
What here shall miss, our toil shall strive to mend.
What if her eyes were there, they in her head?
What if it be a poison which the friar
What if this mixture do not work at all?
What is her burying gave, that is her womb;
What is it else? A madness most discreet,
What, is my daughter gone to Friar Laurence?
What is your will?
What lady's that, which doth enrich the hand
What mean these masterless and gory swords
What, not a word? You take your pennyworths now!
What, rouse thee, man! Thy Juliet is alive,
What's Montague? it is nor hand, nor foot,
What said my man when my betossed soul
What says he of our marriage? What of that?
What say'st thou? Hast thou not a word of joy?
What say you, Simon Catling?
What's here? A cup, clos'd in my true love's hand?
What simpleness is this.- I come, I come! [Knock.]
What's in a name? That which we call a rose
What sorrow craves acquaintance at my hand
What torch is yond that vainly lends his light
What unaccustom'd cause procures her hither?
What, wilt thou wash him from his grave with tears?
What, with a torch? Muffle me, night, awhile.
When I, thy three-hours wife, have mangled it?
When King Cophetua lov'd the beggar maid!
When but love's shadows are so rich in joy.
'When griping grief the heart doth wound,
When he bestrides the lazy-pacing clouds
When it did taste the wormwood on the nipple
When it hoars ere it be spent.
When presently through all thy veins shall run
When theirs are dry, for Romeo's banishment.
When thou didst bower the spirit of a fiend
When well apparell'd April on the heel
Where I may read who pass'd that passing fair?
Where Juliet lives; and every cat and dog
Where all the kindred of the Capulets lie.
Where and what time thou wilt perform the rite;
Where be these enemies? Capulet, Montage,
Where bloody Tybalt, yet but green in earth,
Where civil blood makes civil hands unclean.
Where for this many hundred years the bones
Where is my father and my mother, nurse?
Where is my lady's lord, where's Romeo?
Where is my page? Go, villain, fetch a surgeon.
Where is she? and how doth she! and what says
Where is the County's page that rais'd the watch?
Where is the County's page that rais'd the watch?
"Where is your mother?"'
Where on a sudden one hath wounded me
Where's Romeo's man? What can he say in this?
Where's Romeo's man? What can he say in this?
Where serpents are; chain me with roaring bears,
Where shall we dine? O me! What fray was here?
Where should she be? How oddly thou repliest!
Where that same banish'd runagate doth live,
Where the infectious pestilence did reign,
Where thou shalt live till we can find a time
Whereto I have invited many a guest,
Where, underneath the grove of sycamore
Which are the children of an idle brain,
Which, as he breath'd defiance to my ears,
Which, as they kiss, consume. The sweetest honey
Which, but their children's end, naught could remove,
Which craves as desperate an execution
Which heavy sorrow makes them apt unto.
Which is as thin of substance as the air,
Which is the god of my idolatry,
Which, like a usurer, abound'st in all,
Which mannerly devotion shows in this;
Which modern lamentation might have mov'd?
Which oft the angry Mab with blisters plagues,
Which once untangled much misfortune bodes
Which, on more view of many, mine, being one,
Which she hath prais'd him with above compare
Which should bedeck thy shape, thy love, thy wit.
Which ten times faster glide than the sun's beams
Which the commission of thy years and art
Which the dark night hath so discovered.
Which then most sought where most might not be found,
Which thou wilt propagate, to have it prest
Which, too much minded by herself alone,
Which too untimely here did scorn the earth.
Which to the high topgallant of my joy
Which, well thou knowest, is cross and full of sin.
Which with sweet water nightly I will dew,
Which you, mistaking, offer up to joy.
Which you weep for.
While we were interchanging thrusts and blows,
Whipp'd and tormented and- God-den, good fellow.
Whiter than new snow upon a raven's back.
Who, all as hot, turns deadly point to point,
Who, even in pure and vestal modesty,
Who ever would have thought it? Romeo!
Who had but newly entertain'd revenge,
Who here hath lain this two days buried.
Who here hath lain this two days buried.
Who is already sick and pale with grief
Who knocks so hard? Whence come you? What's your will?
Who, nothing hurt withal, hiss'd him in scorn.
Who now the price of his dear blood doth owe?
Who, raging with thy tears and they with them,
Whose misadventur'd piteous overthrows
Whose names are written there, and to them say,
Whose sale is present death in Mantua,
Why I descend into this bed of death
Why art thou yet so fair? Shall I believe
Why followed not, when she said 'Tybalt's dead,'
Why, lamb! why, lady! Fie, you slug-abed!
Why, love, I say! madam! sweetheart! Why, bride!
Why railest thou on thy birth, the heaven, and earth?
Why should you fall into so deep an O?  [He rises]
Why 'silver sound'? Why 'music with her silver sound'?
Why then, O brawling love! O loving hate!
Wife, go you to her ere you go to bed;
Will I set up my everlasting rest
Will ne'er wear out the everlasting flint.
Will now deny to dance? She that makes dainty,
Will they not hear? What, ho! you men, you beasts,
Will watch thy waking, and that very night
Will you be ready? Do you like this haste?
Will you go to them? I will bring you thither.
Wilt thou not, Jule?' It stinted, and said 'Ay.'
Wilt thou not, Jule?' and, by my holidam,
With Cupid's arrow. She hath Dian's wit,
With Romeo till I behold him- dead-
With Tybalt's slander- Tybalt, that an hour
With all the admired beauties of Verona.
With baleful weeds and precious-juiced flowers.
With blood remov'd but little from her own?
With gentle breath, calm look, knees humbly bow'd-
With instruments upon them fit to open
With instruments upon them fit to open
Within the infant rind of this small flower
Within this hour my man shall be with thee
Within this three hours will fair Juliet wake.
Within thy help and holy physic lies.
With more of thine. This love that thou hast shown
With nimble soles; I have a soul of lead
With open outcry, toward our monument.
With open outcry, toward our monument.
Without a sudden calm will overset
Without that title. Romeo, doff thy name;
With piercing steel at bold Mercutio's breast;
With purple fountains issuing from your veins!
With reeky shanks and yellow chapless skulls;
With repetition of my Romeo's name.
With speedy help doth lend redress.' [Exit.]
With tears augmenting the fresh morning's dew,
With tender Juliet match'd, is now not fair.
With this night's revels and expire the term
With thy black mantle till strange love, grown bold,
With twenty hundred thousand times more joy
With worms that are thy chambermaids. O, here
Women may fall when there's no strength in men.
Would I were sleep and peace, so sweet to rest!
Would none but I might venge my cousin's death!
Would through the airy region stream so bright
'Yea,' quoth he, 'dost thou fall upon thy face?
'Yea,' quoth my husband, 'fall'st upon thy face?
Yet I should kill thee with much cherishing.
Yet most suspected, as the time and place
Yet most suspected, as the time and place
Yet nature's tears are reason's merriment.
Yet put it out, for I would not be seen.
Yet tell me not, for I have heard it all.
You, Capulet, shall go along with me;
You are a saucy boy. Is't so, indeed?
You are to blame, my lord, to rate her so.
You are welcome, gentlemen! Come, musicians, play.
You'll make a mutiny among my guests!
You'll not endure him? God shall mend my soul!
You must contrary me! Marry, 'tis time.-
Young Adam Cupid, he that shot so trim
Young son, it argues a distempered head
Your first is dead- or 'twere as good he were
Your high displeasure. All this- uttered
Your lady's love against some other maid
Your lives shall pay the forfeit of the peace.
Your looks are pale and wild and do import
'Your love says, like an honest gentleman,
Your part in her you could not keep from death,
Your tributary drops belong to woe,
Your worship in that sense may call him man.
You tallow-face!
You, to remove that siege of grief from her,
You, to remove that siege of grief from her,
You will set cock-a-hoop! you'll be the man!
'a? Gentlemen, can any of you tell me where I may find the young
addle as an egg for quarrelling. Thou hast quarrell'd with a man
a hole.
a letter?
am a pretty piece of flesh.
and a crow of iron.
and a kind, and a handsome; and, I warrant, a virtuous- Where is
 and all the GUESTS and GENTLEWOMEN to the Masquers.
and crush a cup of wine. Rest you merry! Exit.
and is he a man to encounter Tybalt?
and they unwash'd too, 'tis a foul thing.
an egg is full of meat; and yet thy head hath been beaten as
any man's, yet his leg excels all men's; and for a hand and a
are past compare. He is not the flower of courtesy, but, I'll
art as well as by nature. For this drivelling love is like a
as another man, if I see occasion in a good quarrel, and the law
behaviour, as they say; for the gentlewoman is young; and
bench? O, their bones, their bones!
better love to berhyme her), Dido a dowdy, Cleopatra a gypsy,
butcher of a silk button, a duellist, a duellist! a gentleman of
but not to the purpose. Signior Romeo, bon jour! There's a French
but 'tis enough, 'twill serve. Ask for me to-morrow, and you
by too, and suffer every knave to use me at his pleasure!
came you between us? I was hurt under your arm.
cannot sum up sum of half my wealth.
case as mine a man may strain courtesy.
choose a man. Romeo? No, not he. Though his face be better than
come to the whole depth of my tale, and meant indeed to occupy
confines of a tavern, claps me his sword upon the table and says
courageous captain of compliments. He fights as you sing
cup draws him on the drawer, when indeed there is no need.
dared.
disgrace to them, if they bear it.
dry-beat the rest of the eight. Will you pluck your sword out of
ere it be out.
ever thrust to the wall. Therefore I will push Montague's men
everything in extremity. I must hence to wait. I beseech you
fairly last night.
fiddlestick; here's that shall make you dance. Zounds, consort!
fingers. Therefore he that cannot lick his fingers goes not with
flies, these fashion-mongers, these pardona-mi's, who stand so
flirt-gills; I am none of his skains-mates. And thou must stand
follow straight.
foot, and a body, though they be not to be talk'd on, yet they
for coughing in the street, because he hath wakened thy dog that
for, in the great chamber.
for sounding.
for the goose.
for tying his new shoes with an old riband? And yet thou wilt
found him than he was when you sought him. I am the youngest of
from the wall and thrust his maids to the wall.
goose, proves thee far and wide a broad goose.
grandsir, that we should be thus afflicted with these strange
great natural that runs lolling up and down to hide his bauble in
hast more of the wild goose in one of thy wits than, I am sure, I
hath lain asleep in the sun. Didst thou not fall out with a
have in my whole five. Was I with you there for the goose?
here writ. I must to the learned. In good time!
here writ, and can never find what names the writing person hath
her sometimes, and tell her that Paris is the properer man; but
his nets; but I am sent to find those persons whose names are
his pitcher by the ears? Make haste, lest mine be about your ears
ill thing to be off'red to any gentlewoman, and very weak dealing.
immortal passado! the punto reverse! the hay.
in. Laura, to his lady, was but a kitchen wench (marry, she had a
in the versal world. Doth not rosemary and Romeo begin both with
into a fool's paradise, as they say, it were a very gross kind of
is get afire by thine own ignorance,
is 'music with her silver sound' because musicians have no gold
it begins with some other letter; and she hath the prettiest
it, is a gentlemanlike offer.
keep to myself; but first let me tell ye, if ye should lead her
man! a very good whore!' Why, is not this a lamentable thing,
man to bow in the hams.
master's kinsmen.
me.
me?
mean to make bold withal, and, as you shall use me hereafter,
minim rest, one, two, and the third in your bosom! the very
minstrel.
minstrels of us, look to hear nothing but discords. Here's my
mourners, and stay dinner.
mouse, a cat, to scratch a man to death! a braggart, a rogue, a
moved.
much on the new form that they cannot sit at ease on the old
my young lady bid me enquire you out. What she bid me say, I will
narrow to an ell broad!
new tuners of accent! 'By Jesu, a very good blade! a very tall
occasion.
of woe.' O, play me some merry dump to comfort me.
 on Juliet and shutting the curtains.]
one would kill the other. Thou! why, thou wilt quarrel with a man
on my side.
pricksong-keeps time, distance, and proportion; rests me his
pump, that, when the single sole of it is worn, the jest may
quivers. Scurvy knave! Pray you, sir, a word; and, as I told you,
read anything you see?
reason but because thou hast hazel eyes. What eye but such an eye
remain, after the wearing, solely singular.
salutation to your French slop. You gave us the counterfeit
sententious of it, of you and rosemary, that it would do you good
shall find me a grave man. I am peppered, I warrant, for this
should quickly have been out, I warrant you. I dare draw as soon
[singing] lady, lady, lady.
something stale and hoar ere it be spent
soul, had as lieve see a toad, a very toad, as see him. I anger
speak more in a minute than he will stand to in a month.
tailor for wearing his new doublet before Easter, with another
that hath a hair more or a hair less in his beard than thou hast.
that name, for fault of a worse.
that the shoemaker should meddle with his yard and the tailor
the argument no longer.
the fee simple of my life for an hour and a quarter.
their fingers.
their heads.
then enter three or four CITIZENS with clubs.
therefore, if you should deal double with her, truly it were an
the two.
the very first house, of the first and second cause. Ah, the
 this of Juliet and her Romeo.
this that was so full of his ropery?
thou fishified! Now is he for the numbers that Petrarch flowed
thou loves me, let the porter let in Susan Grindstone and Nell.
thou sociable, now art thou Romeo; now art thou what thou art, by
thumb, sir.
[to SECOND CAPULET]
to hear it.
to the plate. Good thou, save me a piece of marchpane and, as
town, one Paris, that would fain lay knife aboard; but she, good
tutor me from quarrelling!
upon the prick of noon.
very pin of his heart cleft with the blind bow-boy's butt-shaft;
villain, that fights by the book of arithmetic! Why the devil
wall.
wall of any man or maid of Montague's.
warrant him, as gentle as a lamb. Go thy ways, wench; serve God.
wench's black eye; shot through the ear with a love song; the
were lustier than he is, and twenty such jacks; and if I cannot,
when 'twas a little prating thing - O, there is a nobleman in
wisely.
wit, and put up my iron dagger. Answer me like men.
 with five or six other MASQUERS and TORCHBEARES.
with his last, the fisher with his pencil and the painter with
with the men, I will be cruel with the maids- I will cut off
world. A plague o' both your houses! Zounds, a dog, a rat, a
would spy out such a quarrel? Thy head is as full of quarrels as
young lady ask'd for, the nurse curs'd in the pantry, and
your mother?
THE PROLOGUE

Enter CHORUS.

Chorus.

Two households, both alike in dignity,

In fair Verona, where we lay our scene,

From ancient grudge break to new mutiny,

Where civil blood makes civil hands unclean.

From forth the fatal loins of these two foes

A pair of star-cross'd lovers take their life;

Whose misadventur'd piteous overthrows

Doth with their death bury their parents' strife.

The fearful passage of their death-mark'd love,

And the continuance of their parents' rage,

Which, but their children's end, naught could remove,

Is now the two hours' traffic of our stage;

The which if you with patient ears attend,

What here shall miss, our toil shall strive to mend.

[Exit.]

 

ACT I.

SCENE I.

Verona. A public place.

 

Enter SAMSON and GREGORY, of the house of Capulet, with swords and bucklers.

 

Samp. Gregory, on my word, we'll not carry coals.

Greg. No, for then we should be colliers.

Samp. I mean, an we be in choler, we'll draw.

Greg. Ay, while you live, draw your neck out of collar.

Samp. I strike quickly, being moved.

Greg. But thou art not quickly moved to strike.

Samp. A dog of the house of Montague moves me.

Greg. To move is to stir, and to be valiant is to stand.

Therefore, if thou art moved, thou runn'st away.

Samp. A dog of that house shall move me to stand. I will take the

wall of any man or maid of Montague's.

Greg. That shows thee a weak slave; for the weakest goes to the

wall.

Samp. 'Tis true; and therefore women, being the weaker vessels, are

ever thrust to the wall. Therefore I will push Montague's men

from the wall and thrust his maids to the wall.

Greg. The quarrel is between our masters and us their men.

Samp. 'Tis all one. I will show myself a tyrant. When I have fought

with the men, I will be cruel with the maids- I will cut off

their heads.

Greg. The heads of the maids?

Samp. Ay, the heads of the maids, or their maidenheads.

Take it in what sense thou wilt.

Greg. They must take it in sense that feel it.

Samp. Me they shall feel while I am able to stand; and 'tis known I

am a pretty piece of flesh.

Greg. 'Tis well thou art not fish; if thou hadst, thou hadst been

Poor John. Draw thy tool - Here comes two of the house of

Montagues.

 

Enter ABRAM and BALTHASAR, two SERVINGMEN of the MONTAGUES.

 

Samp. My naked weapon is out. Quarrel! I will back thee.

Greg. How? turn thy back and run?

Samp. Fear me not.

Greg. No, marry. I fear thee!

Samp. Let us take the law of our sides; let them begin.

Greg. I will frown as I pass by, and let them take it as they list.

Samp. Nay, as they dare. I will bite my thumb at them; which is

disgrace to them, if they bear it.

Abram. Do you bite your thumb at us, sir?

Samp. I do bite my thumb, sir.

Abram. Do you bite your thumb at us, sir?

Samp. [aside to GREGORY] Is the law of our side if I say ay?

Greg. [aside to SAMSON] No.

Samp. No, sir, I do not bite my thumb at you, sir; but I bite my

thumb, sir.

Greg. Do you quarrel, sir?

Abram. Quarrel, sir? No, sir.

Samp. If you do, sir, am for you. I serve as good a man as you.

Abram. No better.

Samp. Well, sir.

Greg. [aside to SAMPSON] Say 'better.' Here comes one of my

master's kinsmen.

Samp. Yes, better, sir.

Abr. You lie.

Samp. Draw, if you be men. Gregory, remember thy swashing blow.

[They fight.]

 

Enter BENVOLIO.

 

Ben. Part, fools! [Beats down their swords.]

Put up your swords. You know not what you do.

 

Enter TYBALT.

 

Tyb. What, art thou drawn among these heartless hinds?

Turn thee Benvolio! look upon thy death.

Ben. I do but keep the peace. Put up thy sword,

Or manage it to part these men with me.

Tyb. What, drawn, and talk of peace? I hate the word

As I hate hell, all Montagues, and thee.

Have at thee, coward!

[They fight.]

 

Enter several of both houses, who join yhe fray;

then enter three or four CITIZENS with clubs.

 

 Citizens. Clubs, bills, and partisans! Strike! beat them down!

 Down with the Capulets! Down with the Montagues!

 

Enter old CAPULET in his gown, and LADY CAPULET.

 

Cap. What noise is this? Give me my long sword, ho!

Lady Cap. A crutch, a crutch! Why call you for a sword?

Cap. My sword, I say! Old Montague is come

And flourishes his blade in spite of me.

 

Enter old MONTAGUE and LADY MONTAGUE.

 

Mont. Thou villain Capulet!- Hold me not, let me go.

Lady Mont. Thou shalt not stir one foot to seek a foe.

 

Enter Prince ESCALUS with his TRAIN.

 

Prince. Rebellious subjects, enemies to peace,

Profaners of this neighbour-stained steel-

Will they not hear? What, ho! you men, you beasts,

That quench the fire of your pernicious rage

With purple fountains issuing from your veins!

On pain of torture, from those bloody hands

Throw your mistempered weapons to the ground

And hear the sentence of your moved prince.

Three civil brawls, bred of an airy word

By thee, old Capulet, and Montague,

Have thrice disturb'd the quiet of our streets

And made Verona's ancient citizens

Cast by their grave beseeming ornaments

To wield old partisans, in hands as old,

Cank'red with peace, to part your cank'red hate.

If ever you disturb our streets again,

Your lives shall pay the forfeit of the peace.

For this time all the rest depart away.

You, Capulet, shall go along with me;

And, Montague, come you this afternoon,

To know our farther pleasure in this case,

To old Freetown, our common judgment place.

Once more, on pain of death, all men depart.

 

[Exeunt all but MONTAGUE, LADY MONTAGUE and BENVOLIO].

 

Mont. Who set this ancient quarrel new abroach?

Speak, nephew, were you by when it began?

Ben. Here were the servants of your adversary

And yours, close fighting ere I did approach.

I drew to part them. In the instant came

The fiery Tybalt, with his sword prepar'd;

Which, as he breath'd defiance to my ears,

He swung about his head and cut the winds,

Who, nothing hurt withal, hiss'd him in scorn.

While we were interchanging thrusts and blows,

Came more and more, and fought on part and part,

Till the Prince came, who parted either part.

Lady Mont. O, where is Romeo? Saw you him to-day?

Right glad I am he was not at this fray.

Ben. Madam, an hour before the worshipp'd sun

Peer'd forth the golden window of the East,

A troubled mind drave me to walk abroad;

Where, underneath the grove of sycamore

That westward rooteth from the city's side,

So early walking did I see your son.

Towards him I made; but he was ware of me

And stole into the covert of the wood.

I- measuring his affections by my own,

Which then most sought where most might not be found,

Being one too many by my weary self-

Pursu'd my humour, not Pursuing his,

And gladly shunn'd who gladly fled from me.

Mont. Many a morning hath he there been seen,

With tears augmenting the fresh morning's dew,

Adding to clouds more clouds with his deep sighs;

But all so soon as the all-cheering sun

Should in the farthest East bean to draw

The shady curtains from Aurora's bed,

Away from light steals home my heavy son

And private in his chamber pens himself,

Shuts up his windows, locks fair daylight

And makes himself an artificial night.

Black and portentous must this humour prove

Unless good counsel may the cause remove.

Ben. My noble uncle, do you know the cause?

Mont. I neither know it nor can learn of him

Ben. Have you importun'd him by any means?

Mont. Both by myself and many other friend;

But he, his own affections' counsellor,

Is to himself- I will not say how true-

But to himself so secret and so close,

So far from sounding and discovery,

As is the bud bit with an envious worm

Ere he can spread his sweet leaves to the air

Or dedicate his beauty to the sun.

Could we but learn from whence his sorrows grow,

We would as willingly give cure as know.

 

Enter ROMEO.

 

Ben. See, where he comes. So please you step aside,

I'll know his grievance, or be much denied.

Mont. I would thou wert so happy by thy stay

To hear true shrift. Come, madam, let's away.

 

[Exeunt MONTAGUE and LADY MONTAGUE].

 

Ben. Good morrow, cousin.

Romeo. Is the day so young?

Ben. But new struck nine.

Romeo. Ay me! sad hours seem long.

Was that my father that went hence so fast?

Ben. It was. What sadness lengthens Romeo's hours?

Romeo. Not having that which having makes them short.

Ben. In love?

Romeo. Out-

Ben. Of love?

Romeo. Out of her favour where I am in love.

Ben. Alas that love, so gentle in his view,

Should be so tyrannous and rough in proof!

Romeo. Alas that love, whose view is muffled still,

Should without eyes see pathways to his will!

Where shall we dine? O me! What fray was here?

Yet tell me not, for I have heard it all.

Here's much to do with hate, but more with love.

Why then, O brawling love! O loving hate!

O anything, of nothing first create!

O heavy lightness! serious vanity!

Misshapen chaos of well-seeming forms!

Feather of lead, bright smoke, cold fire, sick health!

Still-waking sleep, that is not what it is

This love feel I, that feel no love in this.

Dost thou not laugh?

Ben. No, coz, I rather weep.

Romeo. Good heart, at what?

Ben. At thy good heart's oppression.

Romeo. Why, such is love's transgression.

Griefs of mine own lie heavy in my breast,

Which thou wilt propagate, to have it prest

With more of thine. This love that thou hast shown

Doth add more grief to too much of mine own.

Love is a smoke rais'd with the fume of sighs;

Being purg'd, a fire sparkling in lovers' eyes;

Being vex'd, a sea nourish'd with lovers' tears.

What is it else? A madness most discreet,

A choking gall, and a preserving sweet.

Farewell, my coz.

Ben. Soft! I will go along.

An if you leave me so, you do me wrong.

Romeo. Tut! I have lost myself; I am not here:

This is not Romeo, he's some other where.

Ben. Tell me in sadness, who is that you love?

Romeo. What, shall I groan and tell thee?

Ben. Groan? Why, no;

But sadly tell me who.

Romeo. Bid a sick man in sadness make his will.

Ah, word ill urg'd to one that is so ill!

In sadness, cousin, I do love a woman.

Ben. I aim'd so near when I suppos'd you lov'd.

Romeo. A right good markman! And she's fair I love.

Ben. A right fair mark, fair coz, is soonest hit.

Romeo. Well, in that hit you miss. She'll not be hit

With Cupid's arrow. She hath Dian's wit,

And, in strong proof of chastity well arm'd,

From Love's weak childish bow she lives unharm'd.

She will not stay the siege of loving terms,

Nor bide th' encounter of assailing eyes,

Nor ope her lap to saint-seducing gold.

O, she's rich in beauty; only poor

That, when she dies, with beauty dies her store.

Ben. Then she hath sworn that she will still live chaste?

Romeo. She hath, and in that sparing makes huge waste;

For beauty, starv'd with her severity,

Cuts beauty off from all posterity.

She is too fair, too wise, wisely too fair,

To merit bliss by making me despair.

She hath forsworn to love, and in that vow

Do I live dead that live to tell it now.

Ben. Be rul'd by me: forget to think of her.

Romeo. O, teach me how I should forget to think!

Ben. By giving liberty unto thine eyes.

Examine other beauties.

Romeo. 'Tis the way

To call hers (exquisite) in question more.

These happy masks that kiss fair ladies' brows,

Being black puts us in mind they hide the fair.

He that is strucken blind cannot forget

The precious treasure of his eyesight lost.

Show me a mistress that is passing fair,

What doth her beauty serve but as a note

Where I may read who pass'd that passing fair?

Farewell. Thou canst not teach me to forget.

Ben. I'll pay that doctrine, or else die in debt. 

[Exeunt.]

 

SCENE II.

 A Street.

 

Enter CAPULET, COUNTY PARIS, and SERVANT - the ClOWN.

 

Cap. But Montague is bound as well as I,

In penalty alike; and 'tis not hard, I think,

For men so old as we to keep the peace.

Paris. Of honourable reckoning are you both,

And pity 'tis you liv'd at odds so long.

But now, my lord, what say you to my suit?

Cap. But saying o'er what I have said before:

My child is yet a stranger in the world,

She hath not seen the change of fourteen years;

Let two more summers wither in their pride

Ere we may think her ripe to be a bride.

Paris. Younger than she are happy mothers made.

Cap. And too soon marr'd are those so early made.

The earth hath swallowed all my hopes but she;

She is the hopeful lady of my earth.

But woo her, gentle Paris, get her heart;

My will to her consent is but a part.

An she agree, within her scope of choice

Lies my consent and fair according voice.

This night I hold an old accustom'd feast,

Whereto I have invited many a guest,

Such as I love; and you among the store,

One more, most welcome, makes my number more.

At my poor house look to behold this night

Earth-treading stars that make dark heaven light.

Such comfort as do lusty young men feel

When well apparell'd April on the heel

Of limping Winter treads, even such delight

Among fresh female buds shall you this night

Inherit at my house. Hear all, all see,

And like her most whose merit most shall be;

Which, on more view of many, mine, being one,

May stand in number, though in reck'ning none.

Come, go with me. [To the SERVANT, giving back a paper]

Go, sirrah, trudge about

Through fair Verona; find those persons out

Whose names are written there, and to them say,

My house and welcome on their pleasure stay.

 

[Exeunt CAPULET and PARIS].

 

Ser. Find them out whose names are written here? It is written

that the shoemaker should meddle with his yard and the tailor

with his last, the fisher with his pencil and the painter with

his nets; but I am sent to find those persons whose names are

here writ, and can never find what names the writing person hath

here writ. I must to the learned. In good time!

 

Enter BENVOLIO and ROMEO.

 

Ben. Tut, man, one fire burns out another's burning;

One pain is lessoned by another's anguish;

Turn giddy, and be holp by backward turning;

One desperate grief cures with another's languish.

Take thou some new infection to thy eye,

And the rank poison of the old will die.

Romeo. Your plantain leaf is excellent for that.

Ben. For what, I pray thee?

Romeo. For your broken shin.

Ben. Why, Romeo, art thou mad?

Romeo. Not mad, but bound more than a madman is;

Shut up in Prison, kept without my food,

Whipp'd and tormented and- God-den, good fellow.

Ser. God gi' go-den. I pray, sir, can you read?

Romeo. Ay, mine own fortune in my misery.

Ser. Perhaps you have learned it without book. But I pray, can you

read anything you see?

Romeo. Ay, If I know the letters and the language.

Ser. Ye say honestly. Rest you merry!

Romeo. Stay, fellow; I can read. [He reads the paper.]

'Signior Martino and his wife and daughters;

County Anselmo and his beauteous sisters;

The lady widow of Vitruvio;

Signior Placentio and His lovely nieces;

Mercutio and his brother Valentine;

Mine uncle Capulet, his wife, and daughters;

My fair niece Rosaline and Livia;

Signior Valentio and His cousin Tybalt;

Lucio and the lively Helena.'

[Giving back the paper.]

A fair assembly. Whither should they come?

Ser. Up.

Romeo. Whither?

Ser. To supper, to our house.

Romeo. Whose house?

Ser. My master's.

Romeo. Indeed I should have ask'd you that before.

Ser. Now I'll tell you without asking. My master is the great rich

Capulet; and if you be not of the house of Montagues, I pray come

and crush a cup of wine. Rest you merry! Exit.

Ben. At this same ancient feast of Capulet's

Sups the fair Rosaline whom thou so lov'st;

With all the admired beauties of Verona.

Go thither, and with unattainted eye

Compare her face with some that I shall show,

And I will make thee think thy swan a crow.

Romeo. When the devout religion of mine eye

Maintains such falsehood, then turn tears to fires;

And these, who, often drown'd, could never die,

Transparent heretics, be burnt for liars!

One fairer than my love? The all-seeing sun

Ne'er saw her match since first the world begun.

Ben. Tut! you saw her fair, none else being by,

Herself pois'd with herself in either eye;

But in that crystal scales let there be weigh'd

Your lady's love against some other maid

That I will show you shining at this feast,

And she shall scant show well that now seems best.

Romeo. I'll go along, no such sight to be shown,

But to rejoice in splendour of my own.

[Exeunt.]

 

SCENE III.

 A room in CAPULET'S house.

 

Enter LADY CAPULET and NURSE.

 

Lady Cap. Nurse, where's my daughter? Call her forth to me.

Nurse. Now, by my maidenhead at twelve year old,

I bade her come. What, lamb! what ladybird!

God forbid! Where's this girl? What, Juliet!

 

Enter JULIET.

 

Juliet. How now? Who calls?

Nurse. Your mother.

Juliet. Madam, I am here.

What is your will?

Lady Cap. This is the matter- Nurse, give leave awhile,

We must talk in secret. Nurse, come back again;

I have rememb'red me, thou's hear our counsel.

Thou knowest my daughter's of a pretty age.

Nurse. Faith, I can tell her age unto an hour.

Lady Cap. She's not fourteen.

Nurse. I'll lay fourteen of my teeth-

And yet, to my teen be it spoken, I have but four-

She is not fourteen. How long is it now

To Lammastide?

Lady Cap. A fortnight and odd days.

Nurse. Even or odd, of all days in the year,

Come Lammas Eve at night shall she be fourteen.

Susan and she (God rest all Christian souls!)

Were of an age. Well, Susan is with God;

She was too good for me. But, as I said,

On Lammas Eve at night shall she be fourteen;

That shall she, marry; I remember it well.

'Tis since the earthquake now eleven years;

And she was wean'd (I never shall forget it),

Of all the days of the year, upon that day;

For I had then laid wormwood to my dug,

Sitting in the sun under the dovehouse wall.

My lord and you were then at Mantua.

Nay, I do bear a brain. But, as I said,

When it did taste the wormwood on the nipple

Of my dug and felt it bitter, pretty fool,

To see it tetchy and fall out with the dug!

Shake, quoth the dovehouse! 'Twas no need, I trow,

To bid me trudge.

And since that time it is eleven years,

For then she could stand high-lone; nay, by th' rood,

She could have run and waddled all about;

For even the day before, she broke her brow;

And then my husband (God be with his soul!

'A was a merry man) took up the child.

'Yea,' quoth he, 'dost thou fall upon thy face?

Thou wilt fall backward when thou hast more wit;

Wilt thou not, Jule?' and, by my holidam,

The pretty wretch left crying, and said 'Ay.'

To see now how a jest shall come about!

I warrant, an I should live a thousand yeas,

I never should forget it. 'Wilt thou not, Jule?' quoth he,

And, pretty fool, it stinted, and said 'Ay.'

Lady Cap. Enough of this. I pray thee hold thy peace.

Nurse. Yes, madam. Yet I cannot choose but laugh

To think it should leave crying and say 'Ay.'

And yet, I warrant, it bad upon it brow

A bump as big as a young cock'rel's stone;

A perilous knock; and it cried bitterly.

'Yea,' quoth my husband, 'fall'st upon thy face?

Thou wilt fall backward when thou comest to age;

Wilt thou not, Jule?' It stinted, and said 'Ay.'

Juliet. And stint thou too, I pray thee, nurse, say I.

Nurse. Peace, I have done. God mark thee to his grace!

Thou wast the prettiest babe that e'er I nurs'd.

An I might live to see thee married once, I have my wish.

Lady Cap. Marry, that 'marry' is the very theme

I came to talk of. Tell me, daughter Juliet,

How stands your disposition to be married?

Juliet. It is an honour that I dream not of.

Nurse. An honour? Were not I thine only nurse,

I would say thou hadst suck'd wisdom from thy teat.

Lady Cap. Well, think of marriage now. Younger than you,

Here in Verona, ladies of esteem,

Are made already mothers. By my count,

I was your mother much upon these years

That you are now a maid. Thus then in brief:

The valiant Paris seeks you for his love.

Nurse. A man, young lady! lady, such a man

As all the world- why he's a man of wax.

Lady Cap. Verona's summer hath not such a flower.

Nurse. Nay, he's a flower, in faith- a very flower.

Lady Cap. What say you? Can you love the gentleman?

This night you shall behold him at our feast.

Read o'er the volume of young Paris' face,

And find delight writ there with beauty's pen;

Examine every married lineament,

And see how one another lends content;

And what obscur'd in this fair volume lies

Find written in the margent of his eyes,

This precious book of love, this unbound lover,

To beautify him only lacks a cover.

The fish lives in the sea, and 'tis much pride

For fair without the fair within to hide.

That book in many's eyes doth share the glory,

That in gold clasps locks in the golden story;

So shall you share all that he doth possess,

By having him making yourself no less.

Nurse. No less? Nay, bigger! Women grow by men

Lady Cap. Speak briefly, can you like of Paris' love?

Juliet. I'll look to like, if looking liking move;

But no more deep will I endart mine eye

Than your consent gives strength to make it fly.

 

Enter a SERVINGMAN.

 

Sev. Madam, the guests are come, supper serv'd up, you call'd, my

young lady ask'd for, the nurse curs'd in the pantry, and

everything in extremity. I must hence to wait. I beseech you

follow straight.

Lady Cap. We follow thee. [Exit a SERVINGMAN].

Juliet, the County stays.

Nurse. Go, girl, seek happy nights to happy days.

[Exeunt.]

 

SCENE IV.

 A street.

 

Enter ROMEO, MERCUTIO, BENVOLIO,

 with five or six other MASQUERS and TORCHBEARES.

 

Romeo. What, shall this speech be spoke for our excuse?

Or shall we on without apology?

Ben. The date is out of such prolixity.

We'll have no Cupid hoodwink'd with a scarf,

Bearing a Tartar's painted bow of lath,

Scaring the ladies like a crowkeeper;

Nor no without-book prologue, faintly spoke

After the prompter, for our entrance;

But, let them measure us by what they will,

We'll measure them a measure, and be gone.

Romeo. Give me a torch. I am not for this ambling.

Being but heavy, I will bear the light.

Mer. Nay, gentle Romeo, we must have you dance.

Romeo. Not I, believe me. You have dancing shoes

With nimble soles; I have a soul of lead

So stakes me to the ground I cannot move.

Mer. You are a lover. Borrow Cupid's wings

And soar with them above a common bound.

Romeo. I am too sore enpierced with his shaft

To soar with his light feathers; and so bound

I cannot bound a pitch above dull woe.

Under love's heavy burthen do I sink.

Mer. And, to sink in it, should you burthen love-

Too great oppression for a tender thing.

Romeo. Is love a tender thing? It is too rough,

Too rude, too boist'rous, and it pricks like thorn.

Mer. If love be rough with you, be rough with love.

Prick love for pricking, and you beat love down.

Give me a case to put my visage in.

A visor for a visor! What care I

What curious eye doth quote deformities?

Here are the beetle brows shall blush for me.

Ben. Come, knock and enter; and no sooner in

But every man betake him to his legs.

Romeo. A torch for me! Let wantons light of heart

Tickle the senseless rushes with their heels;

For I am proverb'd with a grandsire phrase,

I'll be a candle-holder and look on;

The game was ne'er so fair, and I am done.

Mer. Tut! dun's the mouse, the constable's own word!

If thou art Dun, we'll draw thee from the mire

Of this sir-reverence love, wherein thou stick'st

Up to the ears. Come, we burn daylight, ho!

Romeo. Nay, that's not so.

Mer. I mean, sir, in delay

We waste our lights in vain, like lamps by day.

Take our good meaning, for our judgment sits

Five times in that ere once in our five wits.

Romeo. And we mean well, in going to this masque;

But 'tis no wit to go.

Mer. Why, may one ask?

Romeo. I dreamt a dream to-night.

Mer. And so did I.

Romeo. Well, what was yours?

Mer. That dreamers often lie.

Romeo. In bed asleep, while they do dream things true.

Mer. O, then I see Queen Mab hath been with you.

She is the fairies' midwife, and she comes

In shape no bigger than an agate stone

On the forefinger of an alderman,

Drawn with a team of little atomies

Athwart men's noses as they lie asleep;

Her wagon spokes made of long spinners' legs,

The cover, of the wings of grasshoppers;

Her traces, of the smallest spider's web;

Her collars, of the moonshine's wat'ry beams;

Her whip, of cricket's bone; the lash, of film;

Her wagoner, a small grey-coated gnat,

Not half so big as a round little worm

Prick'd from the lazy finger of a maid;

Her chariot is an empty hazelnut,

Made by the joiner squirrel or old grub,

Time out o' mind the fairies' coachmakers.

And in this state she 'gallops night by night

Through lovers' brains, and then they dream of love;

O'er courtiers' knees, that dream on cursies straight;

O'er lawyers' fingers, who straight dream on fees;

O'er ladies' lips, who straight on kisses dream,

Which oft the angry Mab with blisters plagues,

Because their breaths with sweetmeats tainted are.

Sometime she gallops o'er a courtier's nose,

And then dreams he of smelling out a suit;

And sometime comes she with a tithe-pig's tail

Tickling a parson's nose as 'a lies asleep,

Then dreams he of another benefice.

Sometimes she driveth o'er a soldier's neck,

And then dreams he of cutting foreign throats,

Of breaches, ambuscadoes, Spanish blades,

Of healths five fadom deep; and then anon

Drums in his ear, at which he starts and wakes,

And being thus frighted, swears a prayer or two

And sleeps again. This is that very Mab

That plats the manes of horses in the night

And bakes the elflocks in foul sluttish, hairs,

Which once untangled much misfortune bodes

This is the hag, when maids lie on their backs,

That presses them and learns them first to bear,

Making them women of good carriage.

This is she-

Romeo. Peace, peace, Mercutio, peace!

Thou talk'st of nothing.

Mer. True, I talk of dreams;

Which are the children of an idle brain,

Begot of nothing but vain fantasy;

Which is as thin of substance as the air,

And more inconstant than the wind, who wooes

Even now the frozen bosom of the North

And, being anger'd, puffs away from thence,

Turning his face to the dew-dropping South.

Ben. This wind you talk of blows us from ourselves.

Supper is done, and we shall come too late.

Romeo. I fear, too early; for my mind misgives

Some consequence, yet hanging in the stars,

Shall bitterly begin his fearful date

With this night's revels and expire the term

Of a despised life, clos'd in my breast,

By some vile forfeit of untimely death.

But he that hath the steerage of my course

Direct my sail! On, lusty gentlemen!

Ben. Strike, drum.

[They march about the stage and exeunt.]

 

SCENE V.

 A hall in CAPULET'S house

 

MUSICIANS waiting. SERVINGMEN come forth with napkins.

 

First Ser. Where's Potpan, that he helps not to take away?

He shift a trencher! he scrape a trencher!

Second Ser. When good manners shall lie all in one or two men's hands,

and they unwash'd too, 'tis a foul thing.

First Ser. Away with the join-stools, remove the court-cubbert, look

to the plate. Good thou, save me a piece of marchpane and, as

thou loves me, let the porter let in Susan Grindstone and Nell.

Anthony, and Potpan!

Second Ser. Ay, boy, ready.

First Ser. You are looke't for and call'd for, ask't for and sought

for, in the great chamber.

Forth Ser. We cannot be here and there too. Cheerly, boys!

Be brisk awhile, and the longer liver take all.

[They retire behind].

 

Enter CAPULET, LADY CAPULET, JULIET, TYBALT, NURSE

 and all the GUESTS and GENTLEWOMEN to the Masquers.

 

Cap. Welcome, gentlemen! Ladies that have their toes

Unplagu'd with corns will have a bout with you.

Ah ha, my mistresses! which of you all

Will now deny to dance? She that makes dainty,

She I'll swear hath corns. Am I come near ye now?

Welcome, gentlemen! I have seen the day

That I have worn a visor and could tell

A whispering tale in a fair lady's ear,

Such as would please. 'Tis gone, 'tis gone, 'tis gone!

You are welcome, gentlemen! Come, musicians, play.

A hall, a hall! give room! and foot it, girls.

[Music plays, and they dance.]

More light, you knaves! and turn the tables up,

And quench the fire, the room is grown too hot.

Ah, sirrah, this unlook'd-for sport comes well.

Nay, sit, nay, sit, good cousin Capulet,

For you and I are past our dancing days.

How long is't now since last yourself and I

Were in a mask?

Cousin Cap. By'r Lady, thirty years.

Cap. What, man? 'Tis not so much, 'tis not so much!

'Tis since the nuptial of Lucentio,

Come Pentecost as quickly as it will,

Some five-and-twenty years, and then we mask'd.

Cousin Cap. 'Tis more, 'tis more! His son is elder, sir;

His son is thirty.

Cap. Will you tell me that?

His son was but a ward two years ago.

Romeo. [to a SERVINGMAN] 

What lady's that, which doth enrich the hand

Of yonder knight?

Ser. I know not, sir.

Romeo. O, she doth teach the torches to burn bright!

It seems she hangs upon the cheek of night

Like a rich jewel in an Ethiop's ear-

Beauty too rich for use, for earth too dear!

So shows a snowy dove trooping with crows

As yonder lady o'er her fellows shows.

The measure done, I'll watch her place of stand

And, touching hers, make blessed my rude hand.

Did my heart love till now? Forswear it, sight!

For I ne'er saw true beauty till this night.

Tyb. This, by his voice, should be a Montague.

Fetch me my rapier, boy. [Exit boy.] What, dares the slave

Come hither, cover'd with an antic face,

To fleer and scorn at our solemnity?

Now, by the stock and honour of my kin,

To strike him dead I hold it not a sin.

Cap. Why, how now, kinsman? Wherefore storm you so?

Tyb. Uncle, this is a Montague, our foe;

A villain, that is hither come in spite

To scorn at our solemnity this night.

Cap. Young Romeo is it?

Tyb. 'Tis he, that villain Romeo.

Cap. Content thee, gentle coz, let him alone.

'A bears him like a portly gentleman,

And, to say truth, Verona brags of him

To be a virtuous and well-govern'd youth.

I would not for the wealth of all this town

Here in my house do him disparagement.

Therefore be patient, take no note of him.

It is my will; the which if thou respect,

Show a fair presence and put off these frowns,

An ill-beseeming semblance for a feast.

Tyb. It fits when such a villain is a guest.

I'll not endure him.

Cap. He shall be endur'd.

What, goodman boy? I say he shall. Go to!

Am I the master here, or you? Go to!

You'll not endure him? God shall mend my soul!

You'll make a mutiny among my guests!

You will set cock-a-hoop! you'll be the man!

Tyb. Why, uncle, 'tis a shame.

Cap. Go to, go to!

You are a saucy boy. Is't so, indeed?

This trick may chance to scathe you. I know what.

You must contrary me! Marry, 'tis time.-

Well said, my hearts!- You are a princox- go!

Be quiet, or- More light, more light!- For shame!

I'll make you quiet; what!- Cheerly, my hearts!

Tyb. Patience perforce with wilful choler meeting

Makes my flesh tremble in their different greeting.

I will withdraw; but this intrusion shall,

Now seeming sweet, convert to bitt'rest gall.

[Exit.]

 

Romeo. [to JULIET].

If I profane with my unworthiest hand

This holy shrine, the gentle fine is this:

My lips, two blushing pilgrims, ready stand

To smooth that rough touch with a tender kiss.

Juliet. Good pilgrim, you do wrong your hand too much,

Which mannerly devotion shows in this;

For saints have hands that pilgrims' hands do touch,

And palm to palm is holy palmers' kiss.

Romeo. Have not saints lips, and holy palmers too?

Juliet. Ay, pilgrim, lips that they must use in pray'r.

Romeo. O, then, dear saint, let lips do what hands do!

They pray; grant thou, lest faith turn to despair.

Juliet. Saints do not move, though grant for prayers' sake.

Romeo. Then move not while my prayer's effect I take.

Thus from my lips, by thine my sin is purg'd. [He Kisses her.]

Juliet. Then have my lips the sin that they have took.

Romeo. Sin from my lips? O trespass sweetly urg'd!

Give me my sin again. [He Kisses her.]

Juliet. You kiss by th' book.

 

Nurse. Madam, your mother craves a word with you.

Romeo. What is her mother?

Nurse. Marry, bachelor,

Her mother is the lady of the house.

And a good lady, and a wise and virtuous.

I nurs'd her daughter that you talk'd withal.

I tell you, he that can lay hold of her

Shall have the chinks.

Romeo. Is she a Capulet?

O dear account! my life is my foe's debt.

Ben. Away, be gone; the sport is at the best.

Rom. Ay, so I fear; the more is my unrest.

Cap. Nay, gentlemen, prepare not to be gone;

We have a trifling foolish banquet towards.

[They whisper in his ear.]

Is it e'en so? Why then, I thank you all.

I thank you, honest gentlemen. Good night.

More torches here! - Come on then, let's to bed.

[to SECOND CAPULET]

Ah, sirrah, by my fay, it waxes late;

I'll to my rest.

 

[Exeunt all but JULIET and NURSE].

 

Juliet. Come hither, nurse. What is yond gentleman?

Nurse. The son and heir of old Tiberio.

Juliet. What's he that now is going out of door?

Nurse. Marry, that, I think, be young Petruchio.

Juliet. What's he that follows there, that would not dance?

Nurse. I know not.

Juliet. Go ask his name.- If he be married,

My grave is like to be my wedding bed.

Nurse. His name is Romeo, and a Montague,

The only son of your great enemy.

Juliet. My only love, sprung from my only hate!

Too early seen unknown, and known too late!

Prodigious birth of love it is to me

That I must love a loathed enemy.

Nurse. What's this? what's this?

Juliet. A rhyme I learnt even now

Of one I danc'd withal.

One calls within, 'Juliet.'

Nurse. Anon, anon!

Come, let's away; the strangers all are gone.

[Exeunt.]

 

ACT II.

 

PROLOGUE

 

Enter CHORUS.

 

Chorus. Now old desire doth in his deathbed lie,

And young affection gapes to be his heir;

That fair for which love groan'd for and would die,

With tender Juliet match'd, is now not fair.

Now Romeo is belov'd, and loves again,

Alike bewitched by the charm of looks;

But to his foe suppos'd he must complain,

And she steal love's sweet bait from fearful hooks.

Being held a foe, he may not have access

To breathe such vows as lovers use to swear,

And she as much in love, her means much less

To meet her new beloved anywhere;

But passion lends them power, time means, to meet,

Temp'ring extremities with extreme sweet.

[Exit.]

 

 SCENE I.

Verona. CAPULET'S orchard.

 

Enter ROMEO alone.

 

Romeo. Can I go forward when my heart is here?

Turn back, dull earth, and find thy centre out.

[He leaps the orchad-wall.]

 

Enter BENVOLIO with MERCUTIO.

 

Ben. Romeo! my cousin Romeo! Romeo!

Mer. He is wise,

And, on my life, hath stol'n him home to bed.

Ben. He ran this way, and leapt this orchard wall.

Call, good Mercutio.

Mer. Nay, I'll conjure too.

Romeo! humours! madman! passion! lover!

Appear thou in the likeness of a sigh;

Speak but one rhyme, and I am satisfied!

Cry but 'Ay me!' pronounce but 'love' and 'dove';

Speak to my gossip Venus one fair word,

One nickname for her purblind son and heir,

Young Adam Cupid, he that shot so trim

When King Cophetua lov'd the beggar maid!

He heareth not, he stirreth not, be moveth not;

The ape is dead, and I must conjure him.

I conjure thee by Rosaline's bright eyes.

By her high forehead and her scarlet lip,

By her fine foot, straight leg, and quivering thigh,

And the demesnes that there adjacent lie,

That in thy likeness thou appear to us!

Ben. An if he hear thee, thou wilt anger him.

Mer. This cannot anger him. 'Twould anger him

To raise a spirit in his mistress' circle

Of some strange nature, letting it there stand

Till she had laid it and conjur'd it down.

That were some spite; my invocation

Is fair and honest: in his mistress' name,

I conjure only but to raise up him.

Ben. Come, he hath hid himself among these trees

To be consorted with the humorous night.

Blind is his love and best befits the dark.

Mer. If love be blind, love cannot hit the mark.

Now will he sit under a medlar tree

And wish his mistress were that kind of fruit

As maids call medlars when they laugh alone.

O, Romeo, that she were, O that she were

An open et cetera, thou a pop'rin pear!

Romeo, good night. I'll to my truckle-bed;

This field-bed is too cold for me to sleep.

Come, shall we go?

Ben. Go then, for 'tis in vain

'To seek him here that means not to be found.

 

[Exeunt BENVOLIO and MERCUTIO.]

 

SCENE II.

 

Romeo. [ coming forward.]

He jests at scars that never felt a wound.

[Enter JULIET above at a window.]

But soft! What light through yonder window breaks?

It is the East, and Juliet is the sun!

Arise, fair sun, and kill the envious moon,

Who is already sick and pale with grief

That thou her maid art far more fair than she.

Be not her maid, since she is envious.

Her vestal livery is but sick and green,

And none but fools do wear it. Cast it off.

It is my lady; O, it is my love!

O that she knew she were!

She speaks, yet she says nothing. What of that?

Her eye discourses; I will answer it.

I am too bold; 'tis not to me she speaks.

Two of the fairest stars in all the heaven,

Having some business, do entreat her eyes

To twinkle in their spheres till they return.

What if her eyes were there, they in her head?

The brightness of her cheek would shame those stars

As daylight doth a lamp; her eyes in heaven

Would through the airy region stream so bright

That birds would sing and think it were not night.

See how she leans her cheek upon her hand!

O that I were a glove upon that hand,

That I might touch that cheek!

Juliet. Ay me!

Romeo. She speaks.

O, speak again, bright angel! for thou art

As glorious to this night, being o'er my head,

As is a winged messenger of heaven

Unto the white-upturned wond'ring eyes

Of mortals that fall back to gaze on him

When he bestrides the lazy-pacing clouds

And sails upon the bosom of the air.

Juliet. O Romeo, Romeo! wherefore art thou Romeo?

Deny thy father and refuse thy name!

Or, if thou wilt not, be but sworn my love,

And I'll no longer be a Capulet.

Romeo. [aside] Shall I hear more, or shall I speak at this?

Juiet. 'Tis but thy name that is my enemy.

Thou art thyself, though not a Montague.

What's Montague? it is nor hand, nor foot,

Nor arm, nor face, nor any other part

Belonging to a man. O, be some other name!

What's in a name? That which we call a rose

By any other name would smell as sweet.

So Romeo would, were he not Romeo call'd,

Retain that dear perfection which he owes

Without that title. Romeo, doff thy name;

And for that name, which is no part of thee,

Take all myself.

Romeo. I take thee at thy word.

Call me but love, and I'll be new baptiz'd;

Henceforth I never will be Romeo.

Juliet. What man art thou that, thus bescreen'd in night,

So stumblest on my counsel?

Romeo. By a name

I know not how to tell thee who I am.

My name, dear saint, is hateful to myself,

Because it is an enemy to thee.

Had I it written, I would tear the word.

Juliet. My ears have yet not drunk a hundred words

Of that tongue's utterance, yet I know the sound.

Art thou not Romeo, and a Montague?

Romeo. Neither, fair saint, if either thee dislike.

Juliet. How cam'st thou hither, tell me, and wherefore?

The orchard walls are high and hard to climb,

And the place death, considering who thou art,

If any of my kinsmen find thee here.

Romeo. With love's light wings did I o'erperch these walls;

For stony limits cannot hold love out,

And what love can do, that dares love attempt.

Therefore thy kinsmen are no let to me.

Juliet. If they do see thee, they will murther thee.

Romeo. Alack, there lies more peril in thine eye

Than twenty of their swords! Look thou but sweet,

And I am proof against their enmity.

Juliet. I would not for the world they saw thee here.

Romeo. I have night's cloak to hide me from their sight;

And but thou love me, let them find me here.

My life were better ended by their hate

Than death prorogued, wanting of thy love.

Juliet. By whose direction found'st thou out this place?

Romeo. By love, that first did prompt me to enquire.

He lent me counsel, and I lent him eyes.

I am no pilot; yet, wert thou as far

As that vast shore wash'd with the farthest sea,

I would adventure for such merchandise.

Juliet. Thou knowest the mask of night is on my face;

Else would a maiden blush bepaint my cheek

For that which thou hast heard me speak to-night.

Fain would I dwell on form- fain, fain deny

What I have spoke; but farewell compliment!

Dost thou love me, I know thou wilt say 'Ay';

And I will take thy word. Yet, if thou swear'st,

Thou mayst prove false. At lovers' perjuries,

They say Jove laughs. O gentle Romeo,

If thou dost love, pronounce it faithfully.

Or if thou thinkest I am too quickly won,

I'll frown, and be perverse, and say thee nay,

So thou wilt woo; but else, not for the world.

In truth, fair Montague, I am too fond,

And therefore thou mayst think my haviour light;

But trust me, gentleman, I'll prove more true

Than those that have more cunning to be strange.

I should have been more strange, I must confess,

But that thou overheard'st, ere I was ware,

My true-love passion. Therefore pardon me,

And not impute this yielding to light love,

Which the dark night hath so discovered.

Romeo. Lady, by yonder blessed moon I swear,

That tips with silver all these fruit-tree tops-

Juliet. O, swear not by the moon, th' inconstant moon,

That monthly changes in her circled orb,

Lest that thy love prove likewise variable.

Romeo. What shall I swear by?

Juliet. Do not swear at all;

Or if thou wilt, swear by thy gracious self,

Which is the god of my idolatry,

And I'll believe thee.

Romeo. If my heart's dear love-

Juliet. Well, do not swear. Although I joy in thee,

I have no joy of this contract to-night.

It is too rash, too unadvis'd, too sudden;

Too like the lightning, which doth cease to be

Ere one can say 'It lightens.' Sweet, good night!

This bud of love, by summer's ripening breath,

May prove a beauteous flow'r when next we meet.

Good night, good night! As sweet repose and rest

Come to thy heart as that within my breast!

Romeo. O, wilt thou leave me so unsatisfied?

Juliet. What satisfaction canst thou have to-night?

Romeo. Th' exchange of thy love's faithful vow for mine.

Juliet. I gave thee mine before thou didst request it;

And yet I would it were to give again.

Romeo. Would'st thou withdraw it? For what purpose, love?

Juliet. But to be frank and give it thee again.

And yet I wish but for the thing I have.

My bounty is as boundless as the sea,

My love as deep; the more I give to thee,

The more I have, for both are infinite.

I hear some noise within. Dear love, adieu!

[NURSE calls within.]

Anon, good nurse! Sweet Montague, be true.

Stay but a little, I will come again. [Exit JULIET above.]

Romeo. O blessed, blessed night! I am afeard,

Being in night, all this is but a dream,

Too flattering-sweet to be substantial.

[Enter JULIET above.]

Juliet. Three words, dear Romeo, and good night indeed.

If that thy bent of love be honourable,

Thy purpose marriage, send me word to-morrow,

By one that I'll procure to come to thee,

Where and what time thou wilt perform the rite;

And all my fortunes at thy foot I'll lay

And follow thee my lord throughout the world.

Nurse. [within] Madam!

Juliet. I come, anon.- But if thou meanest not well,

I do beseech thee-

Nurse. [within] Madam!

Juliet. By-and-by I come.-

To cease thy suit and leave me to my grief.

Tomorrow will I send.

Romeo. So thrive my soul-

Juliet. A thousand times good night! [Exit JULIET above].

Romeo. A thousand times the worse, to want thy light!

Love goes toward love as schoolboys from their books;

But love from love, towards school with heavy looks. [Retiring.]

[Enter JULIET above again].

Juiet. Hist! Romeo, hist! O for a falconer's voice

To lure this tassel-gentle back again!

Bondage is hoarse and may not speak aloud;

Else would I tear the cave where Echo lies,

And make her airy tongue more hoarse than mine

With repetition of my Romeo's name.

Romeo!

Romeo. It is my soul that calls upon my name.

How silver-sweet sound lovers' tongues by night,

Like softest music to attending ears!

Juliet. Romeo!

Romeo. My dear?

Juliet. At what o'clock to-morrow

Shall I send to thee?

Romeo. By the hour of nine.

Juliet. I will not fail. 'Tis twenty years till then.

I have forgot why I did call thee back.

Romeo. Let me stand here till thou remember it.

Juliet. I shall forget, to have thee still stand there,

Rememb'ring how I love thy company.

Romeo. And I'll still stay, to have thee still forget,

Forgetting any other home but this.

Juliet. 'Tis almost morning. I would have thee gone-

And yet no farther than a wanton's bird,

That lets it hop a little from her hand,

Like a poor prisoner in his twisted gyves,

And with a silk thread plucks it back again,

So loving-jealous of his liberty.

Romeo. I would I were thy bird.

Juliet. Sweet, so would I.

Yet I should kill thee with much cherishing.

Good night, good night! Parting is such sweet sorrow,

That I shall say good night till it be morrow.

 

[Exit JULIET.]

 

Romeo. Sleep dwell upon thine eyes, peace in thy breast!

Would I were sleep and peace, so sweet to rest!

Hence will I to my ghostly father's cell,

His help to crave and my dear hap to tell.

[Exit.]

 

SCENE III.

FRIAR LAURENCE'S  cell.

 

Enter FRIAR LAURENCE alone, with a basket.

 

Friar L. The grey-ey'd morn smiles on the frowning night,

Check'ring the Eastern clouds with streaks of light;

And flecked darkness like a drunkard reels

From forth day's path and Titan's fiery wheels.

Non, ere the sun advance his burning eye

The day to cheer and night's dank dew to dry,

I must up-fill this osier cage of ours

With baleful weeds and precious-juiced flowers.

The earth that's nature's mother is her tomb.

What is her burying gave, that is her womb;

And from her womb children of divers kind

We sucking on her natural bosom find;

Many for many virtues excellent,

None but for some, and yet all different.

O, mickle is the powerful grace that lies

In plants, herbs, stones, and their true qualities;

For naught so vile that on the earth doth live

But to the earth some special good doth give;

Nor aught so good but, strain'd from that fair use,

Revolts from true birth, stumbling on abuse.

Virtue itself turns vice, being misapplied,

And vice sometime's by action dignified.

Within the infant rind of this small flower

Poison hath residence, and medicine power;

For this, being smelt, with that part cheers each part;

Being tasted, slays all senses with the heart.

Two such opposed kings encamp them still

In man as well as herbs- grace and rude will;

And where the worser is predominant,

Full soon the canker death eats up that plant.

 

Enter ROMEO.

 

Romeo. Good morrow, father.

Friar L. Benedicite!

What early tongue so sweet saluteth me?

Young son, it argues a distempered head

So soon to bid good morrow to thy bed.

Care keeps his watch in every old man's eye,

And where care lodges sleep will never lie;

But where unbruised youth with unstuff'd brain

Doth couch his limbs, there golden sleep doth reign.

Therefore thy earliness doth me assure

Thou art uprous'd with some distemp'rature;

Or if not so, then here I hit it right-

Our Romeo hath not been in bed to-night.

Romeo. That last is true-the sweeter rest was mine.

Friar L. God pardon sin! Wast thou with Rosaline?

Romeo. With Rosaline, my ghostly father? No.

I have forgot that name, and that name's woe.

Friar L. That's my good son! But where hast thou been then?

Romeo. I'll tell thee ere thou ask it me again.

I have been feasting with mine enemy,

Where on a sudden one hath wounded me

That's by me wounded. Both our remedies

Within thy help and holy physic lies.

I bear no hatred, blessed man, for, lo,

My intercession likewise steads my foe.

Friar L. Be plain, good son, and homely in thy drift

Riddling confession finds but riddling shrift.

Romeo. Then plainly know my heart's dear love is set

On the fair daughter of rich Capulet;

As mine on hers, so hers is set on mine,

And all combin'd, save what thou must combine

By holy marriage. When, and where, and how

We met, we woo'd, and made exchange of vow,

I'll tell thee as we pass; but this I pray,

That thou consent to marry us to-day.

Friar L. Holy Saint Francis! What a change is here!

Is Rosaline, that thou didst love so dear,

So soon forsaken? Young men's love then lies

Not truly in their hearts, but in their eyes.

Jesu Maria! What a deal of brine

Hath wash'd thy sallow cheeks for Rosaline!

How much salt water thrown away in waste,

To season love, that of it doth not taste!

The sun not yet thy sighs from heaven clears,

Thy old groans ring yet in mine ancient ears.

Lo, here upon thy cheek the stain doth sit

Of an old tear that is not wash'd off yet.

If e'er thou wast thyself, and these woes thine,

Thou and these woes were all for Rosaline.

And art thou chang'd? Pronounce this sentence then:

Women may fall when there's no strength in men.

Romeo. Thou chid'st me oft for loving Rosaline.

Friar L. For doting, not for loving, pupil mine.

Romeo. And bad'st me bury love.

Friar L. Not in a grave

To lay one in, another out to have.

Romeo. I pray thee chide not. She whom I love now

Doth grace for grace and love for love allow.

The other did not so.

Friar L. O, she knew well

Thy love did read by rote, that could not spell.

But come, young waverer, come go with me.

In one respect I'll thy assistant be;

For this alliance may so happy prove

To turn your households' rancour to pure love.

Romeo. O, let us hence! I stand on sudden haste.

Friar L. Wisely, and slow. They stumble that run fast.

[Exeunt.]

 

SCENE IV.

A street.

 

Enter BENVOLIO and MERCUTIO.

 

Mer. Where the devil should this Romeo be?

Came he not home to-night?

Ben. Not to his father's. I spoke with his man.

Mer. Why, that same pale hard-hearted wench, that Rosaline,

Torments him so that he will sure run mad.

Ben. Tybalt, the kinsman to old Capulet,

Hath sent a letter to his father's house.

Mer. A challenge, on my life.

Ben. Romeo will answer it.

Mer. Any man that can write may answer a letter.

Ben. Nay, he will answer the letter's master, how he dares, being

dared.

Mer. Alas, poor Romeo, he is already dead! stabb'd with a white

wench's black eye; shot through the ear with a love song; the

very pin of his heart cleft with the blind bow-boy's butt-shaft;

and is he a man to encounter Tybalt?

Ben. Why, what is Tybalt?

Mer. More than Prince of Cats, I can tell you. O, he's the

courageous captain of compliments. He fights as you sing

pricksong-keeps time, distance, and proportion; rests me his

minim rest, one, two, and the third in your bosom! the very

butcher of a silk button, a duellist, a duellist! a gentleman of

the very first house, of the first and second cause. Ah, the

immortal passado! the punto reverse! the hay.

Ben. The what?

Mer. The pox of such antic, lisping, affecting fantasticoes- these

new tuners of accent! 'By Jesu, a very good blade! a very tall

man! a very good whore!' Why, is not this a lamentable thing,

grandsir, that we should be thus afflicted with these strange

flies, these fashion-mongers, these pardona-mi's, who stand so

much on the new form that they cannot sit at ease on the old

bench? O, their bones, their bones!

 

Enter ROMEO.

 

Ben. Here comes Romeo! here comes Romeo!

Mer. Without his roe, like a dried herring. O flesh, flesh, how art

thou fishified! Now is he for the numbers that Petrarch flowed

in. Laura, to his lady, was but a kitchen wench (marry, she had a

better love to berhyme her), Dido a dowdy, Cleopatra a gypsy,

Helen and Hero hildings and harlots, This be a gray eye or so,

but not to the purpose. Signior Romeo, bon jour! There's a French

salutation to your French slop. You gave us the counterfeit

fairly last night.

Romeo. Good morrow to you both. What counterfeit did I give you?

Mer. The slip, sir, the slip. Can you not conceive?

Romeo. Pardon, good Mercutio. My business was great, and in such a

case as mine a man may strain courtesy.

Mer. That's as much as to say, such a case as yours constrains a

man to bow in the hams.

Romeo. Meaning, to cursy.

Mer. Thou hast most kindly hit it.

Romeo. A most courteous exposition.

Mer. Nay, I am the very pink of courtesy.

Romeo. Pink for flower.

Mer. Right.

Romeo. Why, then is my pump well-flower'd.

Mer. Well said! Follow me this jest now till thou hast worn out thy

pump, that, when the single sole of it is worn, the jest may

remain, after the wearing, solely singular.

Romeo. O single-sold jest, solely singular for the singleness!

Mer. Come between us, good Benvolio! My wits faint.

Romeo. Swits and spurs, swits and spurs! or I'll cry a match.

Mer. Nay, if our wits run the wild-goose chase, I am done; for thou

hast more of the wild goose in one of thy wits than, I am sure, I

have in my whole five. Was I with you there for the goose?

Romeo. Thou wast never with me for anything when thou wast not there

for the goose.

Mer. I will bite thee by the ear for that jest.

Romeo. Nay, good goose, bite not!

Mer. Thy wit is a very bitter sweeting; it is a most sharp sauce.

Romeo. And is it not, then, well serv'd in to a sweet goose?

Mer. O, here's a wit of cheveril, that stretches from an inch

narrow to an ell broad!

Romeo. I stretch it out for that word 'broad,' which, added to the

goose, proves thee far and wide a broad goose.

Mer. Why, is not this better now than groaning for love? Now art

thou sociable, now art thou Romeo; now art thou what thou art, by

art as well as by nature. For this drivelling love is like a

great natural that runs lolling up and down to hide his bauble in

a hole.

Ben. Stop there, stop there!

Mer. Thou desirest me to stop in my tale against the hair.

Ben. Thou wouldst else have made thy tale large.

Mer. O, thou art deceiv'd! I would have made it short; for I was

come to the whole depth of my tale, and meant indeed to occupy

the argument no longer.

Romeo. Here's goodly gear!

 

Enter NURSE and her Man [PETER].

 

Mer. A sail, a sail!

Ben. Two, two! a shirt and a smock.

Nurse. Peter!

Peter. Anon.

Nurse. My fan, Peter.

Mer. Good Peter, to hide her face; for her fan's the fairer face of

the two.

Nurse. God ye good morrow, gentlemen.

Mer. God ye good-den, fair gentlewoman.

Nurse. Is it good-den?

Mer. 'Tis no less, I tell ye; for the bawdy hand of the dial is now

upon the prick of noon.

Nurse. Out upon you! What a man are you!

Romeo. One, gentlewoman, that God hath made for himself to mar.

Nurse. By my troth, it is well said. 'For himself to mar,' quoth

'a? Gentlemen, can any of you tell me where I may find the young

Romeo?

Romeo. I can tell you; but young Romeo will be older when you have

found him than he was when you sought him. I am the youngest of

that name, for fault of a worse.

Nurse. You say well.

Mer. Yea, is the worst well? Very well took, i' faith! wisely,

wisely.

Nurse. If you be he, sir, I desire some confidence with you.

Ben. She will endite him to some supper.

Mer. A bawd, a bawd, a bawd! So ho!

Romeo. What hast thou found?

Mer. No hare, sir; unless a hare, sir, in a lenten pie, that is

something stale and hoar ere it be spent

[He walks by them and sings.]

An old hare hoar,

And an old hare hoar,

Is very good meat in Lent;

But a hare that is hoar

Is too much for a score

When it hoars ere it be spent.

Romeo, will you come to your father's? We'll to dinner thither.

Romeo. I will follow you.

Mer. Farewell, ancient lady. Farewell,

[singing] lady, lady, lady.

 

[Exeunt MERCUTIO and BENVOLIO.]

 

Nurse. Marry, farewell! I Pray you, Sir, what saucy merchant was

this that was so full of his ropery?

Romeo. A gentleman, nurse, that loves to hear himself talk and will

speak more in a minute than he will stand to in a month.

Nurse. An 'a speak anything against me, I'll take him down, an 'a

were lustier than he is, and twenty such jacks; and if I cannot,

I'll find those that shall. Scurvy knave! I am none of his

flirt-gills; I am none of his skains-mates. And thou must stand

by too, and suffer every knave to use me at his pleasure!

Peter. I saw no man use you at his pleasure. If I had, my weapon

should quickly have been out, I warrant you. I dare draw as soon

as another man, if I see occasion in a good quarrel, and the law

on my side.

Nurse. Now, afore God, I am so vexed that every part about me

quivers. Scurvy knave! Pray you, sir, a word; and, as I told you,

my young lady bid me enquire you out. What she bid me say, I will

keep to myself; but first let me tell ye, if ye should lead her

into a fool's paradise, as they say, it were a very gross kind of

behaviour, as they say; for the gentlewoman is young; and

therefore, if you should deal double with her, truly it were an

ill thing to be off'red to any gentlewoman, and very weak dealing.

Romeo. Nurse, commend me to thy lady and mistress. I protest unto thee-

Nurse. Good heart, and I faith I will tell her as much. Lord,

Lord, she will be a joyful woman.

Romeo. What wilt thou tell her, nurse? Thou dost not mark me.

Nurse. I will tell her, sir, that you do protest, which, as I take

it, is a gentlemanlike offer.

Romeo. Bid her devise

Some means to come to shrift this afternoon;

And there she shall at Friar Laurence' cell

Be shriv'd and married. Here is for thy pains.

Nurse. No, truly, sir; not a penny.

Romeo. Go to! I say you shall.

Nurse. This afternoon, sir? Well, she shall be there.

Romeo. And stay, good nurse, behind the abbey wall.

Within this hour my man shall be with thee

And bring thee cords made like a tackled stair,

Which to the high topgallant of my joy

Must be my convoy in the secret night.

Farewell. Be trusty, and I'll quit thy pains.

Farewell. Commend me to thy mistress.

Nurse. Now God in heaven bless thee! Hark you, sir.

Romeo. What say'st thou, my dear nurse?

Nurse. Is your man secret? Did you ne'er hear say,

Two may keep counsel, putting one away?

Rom. I warrant thee my man's as true as steel.

Nurse. Well, sir, my mistress is the sweetest lady. Lord, Lord!

when 'twas a little prating thing - O, there is a nobleman in

town, one Paris, that would fain lay knife aboard; but she, good

soul, had as lieve see a toad, a very toad, as see him. I anger

her sometimes, and tell her that Paris is the properer man; but

I'll warrant you, when I say so, she looks as pale as any clout

in the versal world. Doth not rosemary and Romeo begin both with

a letter?

Romeo. Ay, nurse; what of that? Both with an R.

Nurse. Ah, mocker! that's the dog's name. R is for the - No; I know

it begins with some other letter; and she hath the prettiest

sententious of it, of you and rosemary, that it would do you good

to hear it.

Romeo. Commend me to thy lady.

Nurse. Ay, a thousand times. [Exit Romeo.] Peter!

Peter. Anon.

Nurse. Peter, take my fan, and go before, and apace.

[Exeunt.]

 

SCENE V.

 CAPULET'S orchard.

 

Enter JULIET.

 

Juliet. The clock struck nine when I did send the nurse;

In half an hour she 'promis'd to return.

Perchance she cannot meet him. That's not so.

O, she is lame! Love's heralds should be thoughts,

Which ten times faster glide than the sun's beams

Driving back shadows over low'ring hills.

Therefore do nimble-pinion'd doves draw Love,

And therefore hath the wind-swift Cupid wings.

Now is the sun upon the highmost hill

Of this day's journey, and from nine till twelve

Is three long hours; yet she is not come.

Had she affections and warm youthful blood,

She would be as swift in motion as a ball;

My words would bandy her to my sweet love,

And his to me,

But old folks, many feign as they were dead-

Unwieldy, slow, heavy and pale as lead.

 

Enter NURSE [and PETER].

 

O God, she comes! O honey nurse, what news?

Hast thou met with him? Send thy man away.

Nurse. Peter, stay at the gate. [Exit PETER.]

Juliet. Now, good sweet nurse- O Lord, why look'st thou sad?

Though news be sad, yet tell them merrily;

If good, thou shamest the music of sweet news

By playing it to me with so sour a face.

Nurse. I am aweary, give me leave awhile.

Fie, how my bones ache! What a jaunce have I had!

Juliet. I would thou hadst my bones, and I thy news.

Nay, come, I pray thee speak. Good, good nurse, speak.

Nurse. Jesu, what haste! Can you not stay awhile?

Do you not see that I am out of breath?

Juliet. How art thou out of breath when thou hast breath

To say to me that thou art out of breath?

The excuse that thou dost make in this delay

Is longer than the tale thou dost excuse.

Is thy news good or bad? Answer to that.

Say either, and I'll stay the circumstance.

Let me be satisfied, is't good or bad?

Nurse. Well, you have made a simple choice; you know not how to

choose a man. Romeo? No, not he. Though his face be better than

any man's, yet his leg excels all men's; and for a hand and a

foot, and a body, though they be not to be talk'd on, yet they

are past compare. He is not the flower of courtesy, but, I'll

warrant him, as gentle as a lamb. Go thy ways, wench; serve God.

What, have you din'd at home?

Juliet. No, no. But all this did I know before.

What says he of our marriage? What of that?

Nurse. Lord, how my head aches! What a head have I!

It beats as it would fall in twenty pieces.

My back o' t' other side,- ah, my back, my back!

Beshrew your heart for sending me about

To catch my death with jauncing up and down!

Juliet. I' faith, I am sorry that thou art not well.

Sweet, sweet, Sweet nurse, tell me, what says my love?

Nurse. Your love says, like an honest gentleman, and a courteous,

and a kind, and a handsome; and, I warrant, a virtuous- Where is

your mother?

Juliet. Where is my mother? Why, she is within.

Where should she be? How oddly thou repliest!

'Your love says, like an honest gentleman,

"Where is your mother?"'

Nurse. O God's Lady dear!

Are you so hot? Marry come up, I trow.

Is this the poultice for my aching bones?

Henceforward do your messages yourself.

Juliet. Here's such a coil! Come, what says Romeo?

Nurse. Have you got leave to go to shrift to-day?

Jul. I have.

Nurse. Then hie you hence to Friar Laurence' cell;

There stays a husband to make you a wife.

Now comes the wanton blood up in your cheeks:

They'll be in scarlet straight at any news.

Hie you to church; I must another way,

To fetch a ladder, by the which your love

Must climb a bird's nest soon when it is dark.

I am the drudge, and toil in your delight;

But you shall bear the burthen soon at night.

Go; I'll to dinner; hie you to the cell.

Juiet. Hie to high fortune! Honest nurse, farewell.

[Exeunt.]

 

SCENE VI.

FRIAR LAURENCE'S cell.

 

Enter FRIAR [LAURENCE] and ROMEO.

 

Friar L. So smile the heavens upon this holy act

That after-hours with sorrow chide us not!

Romeo. Amen, amen! But come what sorrow can,

It cannot countervail the exchange of joy

That one short minute gives me in her sight.

Do thou but close our hands with holy words,

Then love-devouring death do what he dare-

It is enough I may but call her mine.

Friar L. These violent delights have violent ends

And in their triumph die, like fire and powder,

Which, as they kiss, consume. The sweetest honey

Is loathsome in his own deliciousness

And in the taste confounds the appetite.

Therefore love moderately: long love doth so;

Too swift arrives as tardy as too slow.

 

Enter JULIET somewhat fast and embraces Romeo.

 

Here comes the lady. O, so light a foot

Will ne'er wear out the everlasting flint.

A lover may bestride the gossamer

That idles in the wanton summer air,

And yet not fall; so light is vanity.

Juliet. Good even to my ghostly confessor.

Friar L. Romeo shall thank thee, daughter, for us both.

Juliet. As much to him, else is his thanks too much.

Romeo. Ah, Juliet, if the measure of thy joy

Be heap'd like mine, and that thy skill be more

To blazon it, then sweeten with thy breath

This neighbour air, and let rich music's tongue

Unfold the imagin'd happiness that both

Receive in either by this dear encounter.

Juliet. Conceit, more rich in matter than in words,

Brags of his substance, not of ornament.

They are but beggars that can count their worth;

But my true love is grown to such excess

cannot sum up sum of half my wealth.

Friar L. Come, come with me, and we will make short work;

For, by your leaves, you shall not stay alone

Till Holy Church incorporate two in one.

[Exeunt.]

 

ACT III.

SCENE I.

A public place.

 

Enter MERCUTIO, BENVOLIO and Men.

 

Ben. I pray thee, good Mercutio, let's retire.

The day is hot, the Capulets abroad.

And if we meet, we shall not scape a brawl,

For now, these hot days, is the mad blood stirring.

Mer. Thou art like one of these fellows that, when he enters the

confines of a tavern, claps me his sword upon the table and says

'God send me no need of thee!' and by the operation of the second

cup draws him on the drawer, when indeed there is no need.

Ben. Am I like such a fellow?

Mer. Come, come, thou art as hot a jack in thy mood as any in

Italy; and as soon moved to be moody, and as soon moody to be

moved.

Ben. And what to?

Mer. Nay, an there were two such, we should have none shortly, for

one would kill the other. Thou! why, thou wilt quarrel with a man

that hath a hair more or a hair less in his beard than thou hast.

Thou wilt quarrel with a man for cracking nuts, having no other

reason but because thou hast hazel eyes. What eye but such an eye

would spy out such a quarrel? Thy head is as full of quarrels as

an egg is full of meat; and yet thy head hath been beaten as

addle as an egg for quarrelling. Thou hast quarrell'd with a man

for coughing in the street, because he hath wakened thy dog that

hath lain asleep in the sun. Didst thou not fall out with a

tailor for wearing his new doublet before Easter, with another

for tying his new shoes with an old riband? And yet thou wilt

tutor me from quarrelling!

Ben. An I were so apt to quarrel as thou art, any man should buy

the fee simple of my life for an hour and a quarter.

Mer. The fee simple? O simple!

 

Enter TYBALT and others.

 

Ben. By my head, here come the Capulets.

Mer. By my heel, I care not.

Tyb. Follow me close, for I will speak to them.

Gentlemen, good den. A word with one of you.

Mer. And but one word with one of us?

Couple it with something; make it a word and a blow.

Tyb. You shall find me apt enough to that, sir, an you will give me

occasion.

Mer. Could you not take some occasion without giving

Tyb. Mercutio, thou consortest with Romeo.

Mer. Consort? What, dost thou make us minstrels? An thou make

minstrels of us, look to hear nothing but discords. Here's my

fiddlestick; here's that shall make you dance. Zounds, consort!

Ben. We talk here in the public haunt of men.

Either withdraw unto some private place

And reason coldly of your grievances,

Or else depart. Here all eyes gaze on us.

Mer. Men's eyes were made to look, and let them gaze.

I will not budge for no man's pleasure, I.

 

Enter ROMEO.

 

Tyb. Well, peace be with you, sir. Here comes my man.

Mer. But I'll be hang'd, sir, if he wear your livery.

Marry, go before to field, he'll be your follower!

Your worship in that sense may call him man.

Tyb. Romeo, the love I bear thee can afford

No better term than this: thou art a villain.

Romeo. Tybalt, the reason that I have to love thee

Doth much excuse the appertaining rage

To such a greeting. Villain am I none.

Therefore farewell. I see thou knowest me not.

Tyb. Boy, this shall not excuse the injuries

That thou hast done me; therefore turn and draw.

Romeo. I do protest I never injur'd thee,

But love thee better than thou canst devise

Till thou shalt know the reason of my love;

And so good Capulet, which name I tender

As dearly as mine own, be satisfied.

Mer. O calm, dishonourable, vile submission!

Alla stoccata carries it away. [He draws.]

Tybalt, you ratcatcher, will you walk?

Tyb. What wouldst thou have with me?

Mer. Good King of Cats, nothing but one of your nine lives. That I

mean to make bold withal, and, as you shall use me hereafter,

dry-beat the rest of the eight. Will you pluck your sword out of

his pitcher by the ears? Make haste, lest mine be about your ears

ere it be out.

Tyb. I am for you. [He draws.]

Romeo. Gentle Mercutio, put thy rapier up.

Mer. Come, sir, your passado!

[They fight.]

Romeo. Draw, Benvolio; beat down their weapons.

Gentlemen, for shame! forbear this outrage!

Tybalt, Mercutio, the Prince expressly hath

Forbid this bandying in Verona streets.

Hold, Tybalt! Good Mercutio!

 

Tybalt under Romeo's arm thrusts Mercutio in.

 

A Follower. Away Tybalt.

 

Exit TYBALT [with his followers].

 

Mer. I am hurt.

A plague o' both your houses! I am sped.

Is he gone and hath nothing?

Ben. What, art thou hurt?

Mer. Ay, ay, a scratch, a scratch. Marry, 'tis enough.

Where is my page? Go, villain, fetch a surgeon.

[Exit PAGE.]

Romeo. Courage, man. The hurt cannot be much.

Mer. No, 'tis not so deep as a well, nor so wide as a church door;

but 'tis enough, 'twill serve. Ask for me to-morrow, and you

shall find me a grave man. I am peppered, I warrant, for this

world. A plague o' both your houses! Zounds, a dog, a rat, a

mouse, a cat, to scratch a man to death! a braggart, a rogue, a

villain, that fights by the book of arithmetic! Why the devil

came you between us? I was hurt under your arm.

Romeo. I thought all for the best.

Mer. Help me into some house, Benvolio,

Or I shall faint. A plague o' both your houses!

They have made worms' meat of me. I have it,

And soundly too. Your houses!

 

[Exit. MERCUTIO with BENVOLIO].

 

Romeo. This gentleman, the Prince's near ally,

My very friend, hath got this mortal hurt

In my behalf- my reputation stain'd

With Tybalt's slander- Tybalt, that an hour

Hath been my kinsman. O sweet Juliet,

Thy beauty hath made me effeminate

And in my temper soft'ned valour's steel

 

Enter BENVOLIO.

 

Ben. O Romeo, Romeo, brave Mercutio's dead!

That gallant spirit hath aspir'd the clouds,

Which too untimely here did scorn the earth.

Rom. This day's black fate on moe days doth depend;

This but begins the woe others must end.

 

Enter TYBALT.

 

Ben. Here comes the furious Tybalt back again.

Romeo. Alive in triumph, and Mercutio slain?

Away to heaven respective lenity,

And fire-ey'd fury be my conduct now!

Now, Tybalt, take the 'villain' back again

That late thou gavest me; for Mercutio's soul

Is but a little way above our heads,

Staying for thine to keep him company.

Either thou or I, or both, must go with him.

Tyb. Thou, wretched boy, that didst consort him here,

Shalt with him hence.

Romeo. This shall determine that.

[They fight. TYBALT falls.]

Ben. Romeo, away, be gone!

The citizens are up, and Tybalt slain.

Stand not amaz'd. The Prince will doom thee death

If thou art taken. Hence, be gone, away!

Romeo. O, I am fortune's fool!

Ben. Why dost thou stay?

 

[Exit ROMEO.]

 

Enter CITIZENS.

 

Citizen. Which way ran he that kill'd Mercutio?

Tybalt, that murtherer, which way ran he?

Ben. There lies that Tybalt.

Citizen. Up, sir, go with me.

I charge thee in the Prince's name obey.

 

Enter PRINCE, MONTAGUE, CAPULET,  their WIVES and ALL.

 

Prince. Where are the vile beginners of this fray?

Ben. O noble Prince. I can discover all

The unlucky manage of this fatal brawl.

There lies the man, slain by young Romeo,

That slew thy kinsman, brave Mercutio.

Lady Cap. Tybalt, my cousin! O my brother's child!

O Prince! O husband! O, the blood is spill'd

Of my dear kinsman! Prince, as thou art true,

For blood of ours shed blood of Montague.

O cousin, cousin!

Prince. Benvolio, who began this bloody fray?

Ben. Tybalt, here slain, whom Romeo's hand did stay.

Romeo, that spoke him fair, bid him bethink

How nice the quarrel was, and urg'd withal

Your high displeasure. All this- uttered

With gentle breath, calm look, knees humbly bow'd-

Could not take truce with the unruly spleen

Of Tybalt deaf to peace, but that he tilts

With piercing steel at bold Mercutio's breast;

Who, all as hot, turns deadly point to point,

And, with a martial scorn, with one hand beats

Cold death aside and with the other sends

It back to Tybalt, whose dexterity

Retorts it. Romeo he cries aloud,

'Hold, friends! friends, part!' and swifter than his tongue,

His agile arm beats down their fatal points,

And 'twixt them rushes; underneath whose arm

An envious thrust from Tybalt hit the life

Of stout Mercutio, and then Tybalt fled;

But by-and-by comes back to Romeo,

Who had but newly entertain'd revenge,

And to't they go like lightning; for, ere I

Could draw to part them, was stout Tybalt slain;

And, as he fell, did Romeo turn and fly.

This is the truth, or let Benvolio die.

Lady Cap. He is a kinsman to the Montague;

Affection makes him false, he speaks not true.

Some twenty of them fought in this black strife,

And all those twenty could but kill one life.

I beg for justice, which thou, Prince, must give.

Romeo slew Tybalt; Romeo must not live.

Prince. Romeo slew him; he slew Mercutio.

Who now the price of his dear blood doth owe?

Mont. Not Romeo, Prince; he was Mercutio's friend;

His fault concludes but what the law should end,

The life of Tybalt.

Prince. And for that offence

Immediately we do exile him hence.

I have an interest in your hate's proceeding,

My blood for your rude brawls doth lie a-bleeding;

But I'll amerce you with so strong a fine

That you shall all repent the loss of mine.

I will be deaf to pleading and excuses;

Nor tears nor prayers shall purchase out abuses.

Therefore use none. Let Romeo hence in haste,

Else, when he is found, that hour is his last.

Bear hence this body, and attend our will.

Mercy but murders, pardoning those that kill.

[Exeunt.]

 

SCENE II.

CAPULET'S orchard.

 

Enter JULIET alone.

 

Juliet. Gallop apace, you fiery-footed steeds,

Towards Phoebus' lodging! Such a wagoner

As Phaeton would whip you to the West

And bring in cloudy night immediately.

Spread thy close curtain, love-performing night,

That runaway eyes may wink, and Romeo

Leap to these arms untalk'd of and unseen.

Lovers can see to do their amorous rites

By their own beauties; or, if love be blind,

It best agrees with night. Come, civil night,

Thou sober-suited matron, all in black,

And learn me how to lose a winning match,

Play'd for a pair of stainless maidenhoods.

Hood my unmann'd blood, bating in my cheeks,

With thy black mantle till strange love, grown bold,

Think true love acted simple modesty.

Come, night; come, Romeo; come, thou day in night;

For thou wilt lie upon the wings of night

Whiter than new snow upon a raven's back.

Come, gentle night; come, loving, black-brow'd night;

Give me my Romeo; and, when he shall die,

Take him and cut him out in little stars,

And he will make the face of heaven so fine

That all the world will be in love with night

And pay no worship to the garish sun.

O, I have bought the mansion of a love,

But not possess'd it; and though I am sold,

Not yet enjoy'd. So tedious is this day

As is the night before some festival

To an impatient child that hath new robes

And may not wear them. O, here comes my nurse,

[Enter NURSE with cords, wringing her hands.]

And she brings news; and every tongue that speaks

But Romeo's name speaks heavenly eloquence.

Now, nurse, what news? What hast thou there? the cords

That Romeo bid thee fetch?

Nurse. Ay, ay, the cords. [Throws them down.]

Juliet. Ay me! what news? Why dost thou wring thy hands

Nurse. Ah, weraday! he's dead, he's dead, he's dead!

We are undone, lady, we are undone!

Alack the day! he's gone, he's kill'd, he's dead!

Juliet. Can heaven be so envious?

Nurse. Romeo can,

Though heaven cannot. O Romeo, Romeo!

Who ever would have thought it? Romeo!

Juliet. What devil art thou that dost torment me thus?

This torture should be roar'd in dismal hell.

Hath Romeo slain himself? Say thou but 'I,'

And that bare vowel 'I' shall poison more

Than the death-darting eye of cockatrice.

I am not I, if there be such an 'I';

Or those eyes shut that make thee answer 'I.'

If be be slain, say 'I'; or if not, 'no.'

Brief sounds determine of my weal or woe.

Nurse. I saw the wound, I saw it with mine eyes,

-God save the mark!- here on his manly breast.

A piteous corse, a bloody piteous corse;

Pale, pale as ashes, all bedaub'd in blood,

All in gore-blood. I swounded at the sight.

Juliet. O, break, my heart! poor bankrout, break at once!

To prison, eyes; ne'er look on liberty!

Vile earth, to earth resign; end motion here,

And thou and Romeo press one heavy bier!

Nurse. O Tybalt, Tybalt, the best friend I had!

O courteous Tybalt! honest gentleman

That ever I should live to see thee dead!

Juliet. What storm is this that blows so contrary?

Is Romeo slaught'red, and is Tybalt dead?

My dear-lov'd cousin, and my dearer lord?

Then, dreadful trumpet, sound the general doom!

For who is living, if those two are gone?

Nurse. Tybalt is gone, and Romeo banished;

Romeo that kill'd him, he is banished.

Juliet. O God! Did Romeo's hand shed Tybalt's blood?

Nurse. It did, it did! alas the day, it did!

Juliet. O serpent heart, hid with a flow'ring face!

Did ever dragon keep so fair a cave?

Beautiful tyrant! fiend angelical!

Dove-feather'd raven! wolvish-ravening lamb!

Despised substance of divinest show!

Just opposite to what thou justly seem'st-

A damned saint, an honourable villain!

O nature, what hadst thou to do in hell

When thou didst bower the spirit of a fiend

In mortal paradise of such sweet flesh?

Was ever book containing such vile matter

So fairly bound? O, that deceit should dwell

In such a gorgeous palace!

Nurse. There's no trust,

No faith, no honesty in men; all perjur'd,

All forsworn, all naught, all dissemblers.

Ah, where's my man? Give me some aqua vitae.

These griefs, these woes, these sorrows make me old.

Shame come to Romeo!

Juliet. Blister'd be thy tongue

For such a wish! He was not born to shame.

Upon his brow shame is asham'd to sit;

For 'tis a throne where honour may be crown'd

Sole monarch of the universal earth.

O, what a beast was I to chide at him!

Nurse. Will you speak well of him that kill'd your cousin?

Juiet. Shall I speak ill of him that is my husband?

Ah, poor my lord, what tongue shall smooth thy name

When I, thy three-hours wife, have mangled it?

But wherefore, villain, didst thou kill my cousin?

That villain cousin would have kill'd my husband.

Back, foolish tears, back to your native spring!

Your tributary drops belong to woe,

Which you, mistaking, offer up to joy.

My husband lives, that Tybalt would have slain;

And Tybalt's dead, that would have slain my husband.

All this is comfort; wherefore weep I then?

Some word there was, worser than Tybalt's death,

That murd'red me. I would forget it fain;

But O, it presses to my memory

Like damned guilty deeds to sinners' minds!

'Tybalt is dead, and Romeo- banished.'

That 'banished,' that one word 'banished,'

Hath slain ten thousand Tybalts. Tybalt's death

Was woe enough, if it had ended there;

Or, if sour woe delights in fellowship

And needly will be rank'd with other griefs,

Why followed not, when she said 'Tybalt's dead,'

Thy father, or thy mother, nay, or both,

Which modern lamentation might have mov'd?

But with a rearward following Tybalt's death,

'Romeo is banished'- to speak that word

Is father, mother, Tybalt, Romeo, Juliet,

All slain, all dead. 'Romeo is banished'-

There is no end, no limit, measure, bound,

In that word's death; no words can that woe sound.

Where is my father and my mother, nurse?

Nurse. Weeping and wailing over Tybalt's corse.

Will you go to them? I will bring you thither.

Juliet. Wash they his wounds with tears? Mine shall be spent,

When theirs are dry, for Romeo's banishment.

Take up those cords. Poor ropes, you are beguil'd,

Both you and I, for Romeo is exil'd.

He made you for a highway to my bed;

But I, a maid, die maiden-widowed.

Come, cords; come, nurse. I'll to my wedding bed;

And death, not Romeo, take my maidenhead!

Nurse. Hie to your chamber. I'll find Romeo

To comfort you. I wot well where he is.

Hark ye, your Romeo will be here at night.

I'll to him; he is hid at Laurence' cell.

Juliet. O, find him! give this ring to my true knight

And bid him come to take his last farewell.

[Exeunt.]

 

SCENE III.

Friar LAURENCE'S cell.

 

Enter FRIAR [LAURENCE].

 

Friar L. Romeo, come forth; come forth, thou fearful man.

Affliction is enanmour'd of thy parts,

And thou art wedded to calamity.

 

Enter ROMEO.

 

Romeo. Father, what news? What is the Prince's doom

What sorrow craves acquaintance at my hand

That I yet know not?

Friar L. Too familiar

Is my dear son with such sour company.

I bring thee tidings of the Prince's doom.

Romeo. What less than doomsday is the Prince's doom?

Friar L. A gentler judgment vanish'd from his lips-

Not body's death, but body's banishment.

Romeo. Ha, banishment? Be merciful, say 'death';

For exile hath more terror in his look,

Much more than death. Do not say 'banishment.'

Friar L. Hence from Verona art thou banished.

Be patient, for the world is broad and wide.

Romeo. There is no world without Verona walls,

But purgatory, torture, hell itself.

Hence banished is banish'd from the world,

And world's exile is death. Then 'banishment'

Is death misterm'd. Calling death 'banishment,'

Thou cut'st my head off with a golden axe

And smilest upon the stroke that murders me.

Friar L. O deadly sin! O rude unthankfulness!

Thy fault our law calls death; but the kind Prince,

Taking thy part, hath rush'd aside the law,

And turn'd that black word death to banishment.

This is dear mercy, and thou seest it not.

Romeo. 'Tis torture, and not mercy. Heaven is here,

Where Juliet lives; and every cat and dog

And little mouse, every unworthy thing,

Live here in heaven and may look on her;

But Romeo may not. More validity,

More honourable state, more courtship lives

In carrion flies than Romeo. They may seize

On the white wonder of dear Juliet's hand

And steal immortal blessing from her lips,

Who, even in pure and vestal modesty,

Still blush, as thinking their own kisses sin;

But Romeo may not- he is banished.

This may flies do, when I from this must fly;

They are free men, but I am banished.

And sayest thou yet that exile is not death?

Hadst thou no poison mix'd, no sharp-ground knife,

No sudden mean of death, though ne'er so mean,

But 'banished' to kill me- 'banished'?

O friar, the damned use that word in hell;

Howling attends it! How hast thou the heart,

Being a divine, a ghostly confessor,

A sin-absolver, and my friend profess'd,

To mangle me with that word 'banished'?

Friar L. Thou fond mad man, hear me a little speak.

Romeo. O, thou wilt speak again of banishment.

Friar L. I'll give thee armour to keep off that word;

Adversity's sweet milk, philosophy,

To comfort thee, though thou art banished.

Romeo. Yet 'banished'? Hang up philosophy!

Unless philosophy can make a Juliet,

Displant a town, reverse a prince's doom,

It helps not, it prevails not. Talk no more.

Friar L. O, then I see that madmen have no ears.

Romeo. How should they, when that wise men have no eyes?

Friar L. Let me dispute with thee of thy estate.

Romeo. Thou canst not speak of that thou dost not feel.

Wert thou as young as I, Juliet thy love,

An hour but married, Tybalt murdered,

Doting like me, and like me banished,

Then mightst thou speak, then mightst thou tear thy hair,

And fall upon the ground, as I do now,

Taking the measure of an unmade grave.

[Knock.]

Friar L. Arise; one knocks. Good Romeo, hide thyself.

Romeo. Not I; unless the breath of heartsick groans,

Mist-like infold me from the search of eyes.

[Knock.]

Friar. Hark, how they knock! Who's there? Romeo, arise;

Thou wilt be taken.- Stay awhile!- Stand up; [Knock.]

Run to my study.- By-and-by!- God's will,

What simpleness is this.- I come, I come! [Knock.]

Who knocks so hard? Whence come you? What's your will?

Nurse. [Within] Let me come in, and you shall know my errand.

I come from Lady Juliet.

Friar L. Welcome then.

 

Enter NURSE.

 

Nurse. O holy friar, O, tell me, holy friar

Where is my lady's lord, where's Romeo?

Friar L. There on the ground, with his own tears made drunk.

Nurse. O, he is even in my mistress' case,

Just in her case!

Friar L. O woeful sympathy!

Piteous predicament!

Nurse. Even so lies she,

Blubb'ring and weeping, weeping and blubbering.

Stand up, stand up! Stand, an you be a man.

For Juliet's sake, for her sake, rise and stand!

Why should you fall into so deep an O?  [He rises]

Romeo. Nurse.

Nurse. Ah sir! ah sir! Well, death's the end of all.

Romeo. Spakest thou of Juliet? How is it with her?

Doth not she think me an old murtherer,

Now I have stain'd the childhood of our joy

With blood remov'd but little from her own?

Where is she? and how doth she! and what says

My conceal'd lady to our cancell'd love?

Nurse. O, she says nothing, sir, but weeps and weeps;

And now falls on her bed, and then starts up,

And Tybalt calls; and then on Romeo cries,

And then down falls again.

Romeo. As if that name,

Shot from the deadly level of a gun,

Did murther her; as that name's cursed hand

Murder'd her kinsman. O, tell me, friar, tell me,

In what vile part of this anatomy

Doth my name lodge? Tell me, that I may sack

The hateful mansion.

Friar L. Hold thy desperate hand.

Art thou a man? Thy form cries out thou art;

Thy tears are womanish, thy wild acts denote

The unreasonable fury of a beast.

Unseemly woman in a seeming man!

Or ill-beseeming beast in seeming both!

Thou hast amaz'd me. By my holy order,

I thought thy disposition better temper'd.

Hast thou slain Tybalt? Wilt thou slay thyself?

And slay thy lady that in thy life lives,

By doing damned hate upon thyself?

Why railest thou on thy birth, the heaven, and earth?

Since birth and heaven and earth, all three do meet

In thee at once; which thou at once wouldst lose.

Fie, fie, thou shamest thy shape, thy love, thy wit,

Which, like a usurer, abound'st in all,

And usest none in that true use indeed

Which should bedeck thy shape, thy love, thy wit.

Thy noble shape is but a form of wax

Digressing from the valour of a man;

Thy dear love sworn but hollow perjury,

Killing that love which thou hast vow'd to cherish;

Thy wit, that ornament to shape and love,

Misshapen in the conduct of them both,

Like powder in a skilless soldier's flask,

is get afire by thine own ignorance,

And thou dismemb'red with thine own defence.

What, rouse thee, man! Thy Juliet is alive,

For whose dear sake thou wast but lately dead.

There art thou happy. Tybalt would kill thee,

But thou slewest Tybalt. There art thou happy too.

The law, that threat'ned death, becomes thy friend

And turns it to exile. There art thou happy.

A pack of blessings light upon thy back;

Happiness courts thee in her best array;

But, like a misbhav'd and sullen wench,

Thou pout'st upon thy fortune and thy love.

Take heed, take heed, for such die miserable.

Go get thee to thy love, as was decreed,

Ascend her chamber, hence and comfort her.

But look thou stay not till the watch be set,

For then thou canst not pass to Mantua,

Where thou shalt live till we can find a time

To blaze your marriage, reconcile your friends,

Beg pardon of the Prince, and call thee back

With twenty hundred thousand times more joy

Than thou went'st forth in lamentation.

Go before, nurse. Commend me to thy lady,

And bid her hasten all the house to bed,

Which heavy sorrow makes them apt unto.

Romeo is coming.

Nurse. O Lord, I could have stay'd here all the night

To hear good counsel. O, what learning is!

My lord, I'll tell my lady you will come.

Romeo. Do so, and bid my sweet prepare to chide.

Nurse. Here is a ring she bid me give you, sir.

Hie you, make haste, for it grows very late. Exit.

Romeo. How well my comfort is reviv'd by this!

Friar L. Go hence; good night; and here stands all your state:

Either be gone before the watch be set,

Or by the break of day disguis'd from hence.

Sojourn in Mantua. I'll find out your man,

And he shall signify from time to time

Every good hap to you that chances here.

Give me thy hand. 'Tis late. Farewell; good night.

Romeo. But that a joy past joy calls out on me,

It were a grief so brief to part with thee.

Farewell.

[Exeunt.]

 

SCENE IV.

CAPULET'S house.

 

Enter CAPULET, LADY CAPULET and PARIS.

 

Cap. Things have fall'n out, sir, so unluckily

That we have had no time to move our daughter.

Look you, she lov'd her kinsman Tybalt dearly,

And so did I. Well, we were born to die.

'Tis very late; she'll not come down to-night.

I promise you, but for your company,

I would have been abed an hour ago.

Paris. These times of woe afford no tune to woo.

Madam, good night. Commend me to your daughter.

Lady Cap. I will, and know her mind early to-morrow;

To-night she's mew'd up to her heaviness.

Cap. Sir Paris, I will make a desperate tender

Of my child's love. I think she will be rul'd

In all respects by me; nay more, I doubt it not.

Wife, go you to her ere you go to bed;

Acquaint her here of my son Paris' love

And bid her (mark you me?) on Wednesday next-

But, soft! what day is this?

Paris. Monday, my lord.

Cap. Monday! ha, ha! Well, Wednesday is too soon.

Thursday let it be, a Thursday, tell her

She shall be married to this noble earl.

Will you be ready? Do you like this haste?

We'll keep no great ado- a friend or two;

For hark you, Tybalt being slain so late,

It may be thought we held him carelessly,

Being our kinsman, if we revel much.

Therefore we'll have some half a dozen friends,

And there an end. But what say you to Thursday?

Paris. My lord, I would that Thursday were tomorrow.

Cap. Well, get you gone. A Thursday be it then.

Go you to Juliet ere you go to bed;

Prepare her, wife, against this wedding day.

Farewell, My lord.- Light to my chamber, ho!

Afore me, It is so very very late

That we may call it early by-and-by.

Good night.

[Exeunt.]

 

SCENE V.

CAPULET'S orchard.

 

Enter ROMEO and JULIET aloft at the window.

 

Juliet. Wilt thou be gone? It is not yet near day.

It was the nightingale, and not the lark,

That pierc'd the fearful hollow of thine ear.

Nightly she sings on yond pomegranate tree.

Believe me, love, it was the nightingale.

Romeo. It was the lark, the herald of the morn;

No nightingale. Look, love, what envious streaks

Do lace the severing clouds in yonder East.

Night's candles are burnt out, and jocund day

Stands tiptoe on the misty mountain tops.

I must be gone and live, or stay and die.

Juliet. Yond light is not daylight; I know it, I.

It is some meteor that the sun exhales

To be to thee this night a torchbearer

And light thee on the way to Mantua.

Therefore stay yet; thou need'st not to be gone.

Romeo. Let me be ta'en, let me be put to death.

I am content, so thou wilt have it so.

I'll say yon grey is not the morning's eye,

'Tis but the pale reflex of Cynthia's brow;

Nor that is not the lark whose notes do beat

The vaulty heaven so high above our heads.

I have more care to stay than will to go.

Come, death, and welcome! Juliet wills it so.

How is't, my soul? Let's talk; it is not day.

Juliet. It is, it is! Hie hence, be gone, away!

It is the lark that sings so out of tune,

Straining harsh discords and unpleasing sharps.

Some say the lark makes sweet division;

This doth not so, for she divideth us.

Some say the lark and loathed toad chang'd eyes;

O, now I would they had chang'd voices too,

Since arm from arm that voice doth us affray,

Hunting thee hence with hunt's-up to the day!

O, now be gone! More light and light it grows.

Romeo. More light and light- more dark and dark our woes!

 

Enter NURSE hastily

 

Nurse. Madam!

Juliet. Nurse?

Nurse. Your lady mother is coming to your chamber.

The day is broke; be wary, look about. [Exit.]

Juliet. Then, window, let day in, and let life out.

Romeo. Farewell, farewell! One kiss, and I'll descend.

[He goes down.]

Juliet. Art thou gone so, my lord, my love, my friend?

I must hear from thee every day in the hour,

For in a minute there are many days.

O, by this count I shall be much in years

Ere I again behold my Romeo!

Romeo. Farewell!

I will omit no opportunity

That may convey my greetings, love, to thee.

Juliet. O, think'st thou we shall ever meet again?

Romeo. I doubt it not; and all these woes shall serve

For sweet discourses in our time to come.

Juliet. O God, I have an ill-divining soul!

Methinks I see thee, now thou art below,

As one dead in the bottom of a tomb.

Either my eyesight fails, or thou look'st pale.

Romeo. And trust me, love, in my eye so do you.

Dry sorrow drinks our blood. Adieu, adieu!

[Exit.]

Juliet. O Fortune, Fortune! all men call thee fickle.

If thou art fickle, what dost thou with him

That is renown'd for faith? Be fickle, Fortune,

For then I hope thou wilt not keep him long

But send him back.

 

Enter LADY CAPULET.

 

Lady Cap. Ho, daughter! are you up?

Juliet. Who is't that calls? It is my lady mother.

Is she not down so late, or up so early?

What unaccustom'd cause procures her hither?

[She goeth down from the window.]

Lady Cap. Why, how now, Juliet?

 [Enter JULIET.]

Juliet. Madam, I am not well.

Lady Cap. Evermore weeping for your cousin's death?

What, wilt thou wash him from his grave with tears?

An if thou couldst, thou couldst not make him live.

Therefore have done. Some grief shows much of love;

But much of grief shows still some want of wit.

Juliet. Yet let me weep for such a feeling loss.

Lady Cap. So shall you feel the loss, but not the friend

Which you weep for.

Juliet. Feeling so the loss,

I cannot choose but ever weep the friend.

Lady Cap. Well, girl, thou weep'st not so much for his death

As that the villain lives which slaughter'd him.

Juliet. What villain, madam?

Lady Cap. That same villain Romeo.

Juliet. [aside] Villain and he be many miles asunder.

God pardon him! I do, with all my heart;

And yet no man like he doth grieve my heart.

Lady Cap. That is because the traitor murderer lives.

Juliet. Ay, madam, from the reach of these my hands.

Would none but I might venge my cousin's death!

Lady Cap. We will have vengeance for it, fear thou not.

Then weep no more. I'll send to one in Mantua,

Where that same banish'd runagate doth live,

Shall give him such an unaccustom'd dram

That he shall soon keep Tybalt company;

And then I hope thou wilt be satisfied.

Juliet. Indeed I never shall be satisfied

With Romeo till I behold him- dead-

Is my poor heart so for a kinsman vex'd.

Madam, if you could find out but a man

To bear a poison, I would temper it-;

That Romeo should, upon receipt thereof,

Soon sleep in quiet. O, how my heart abhors

To hear him nam'd and cannot come to him,

To wreak the love I bore my cousin

Upon his body that hath slaughter'd him.

Lady Cap. Find thou the means, and I'll find such a man.

But now I'll tell thee joyful tidings, girl.

Juiet. And joy comes well in such a needy time.

What are they, I beseech your ladyship?

Lady Cap. Well, well, thou hast a careful father, child;

One who, to put thee from thy heaviness,

Hath sorted out a sudden day of joy

That thou expects not nor I look'd not for.

Juliet. Madam, in happy time! What day is that?

Lady Cap. Marry, my child, early next Thursday morn

The gallant, young, and noble gentleman,

The County Paris, at Saint Peter's Church,

Shall happily make thee there a joyful bride.

Juliet. Now by Saint Peter's Church, and Peter too,

He shall not make me there a joyful bride!

I wonder at this haste, that I must wed

Ere he that should be husband comes to woo.

I pray you tell my lord and father, madam,

I will not marry yet; and when I do, I swear

It shall be Romeo, whom you know I hate,

Rather than Paris. These are news indeed!

Lady Cap. Here comes your father. Tell him so yourself,

And see how be will take it at your hands.

 

Enter CAPULET and NURSE.

 

Cap. When the sun sets the air doth drizzle dew,

But for the sunset of my brother's son

It rains downright.

How now, a conduit, girl? What, still in tears?

Evermore showring? In one little body

Thou counterfeit'st a bark, a sea, a wind:

For still thy eyes, which I may call the sea,

Do ebb and flow with tears; the bark thy body is

Sailing in this salt flood; the winds, thy sighs,

Who, raging with thy tears and they with them,

Without a sudden calm will overset

Thy tempest-tossed body. How now, wife?

Have you delivered to her our decree?

Lady Cap. Ay, sir; but she will none, she gives you thanks.

I would the fool were married to her grave!

Cap. Soft! take me with you, take me with you, wife.

How? Will she none? Doth she not give us thanks?

Is she not proud? Doth she not count her blest,

Unworthy as she is, that we have wrought

So worthy a gentleman to be her bridegroom?

Juliet. Not proud you have, but thankful that you have.

Proud can I never be of what I hate,

But thankful even for hate that is meant love.

Cap. How, how, how, how, choplogic? What is this?

'Proud'- and 'I thank you'- and 'I thank you not'-

And yet 'not proud'? Mistress minion you,

Thank me no thankings, nor proud me no prouds,

But fettle your fine joints 'gainst Thursday next

To go with Paris to Saint Peter's Church,

Or I will drag thee on a hurdle thither.

Out, you green-sickness carrion I out, you baggage!

You tallow-face!

Lady Cap. Fie, fie! what, are you mad?

Juliet. Good father, I beseech you on my knees,

[She kneels down.]

Hear me with patience but to speak a word.

Cap. Hang thee, young baggage! disobedient wretch!

I tell thee what- get thee to church a Thursday

Or never after look me in the face.

Speak not, reply not, do not answer me!

My fingers itch. Wife, we scarce thought us blest

That God had lent us but this only child;

But now I see this one is one too much,

And that we have a curse in having her.

Out on her, hilding!

Nurse. God in heaven bless her!

You are to blame, my lord, to rate her so.

Cap. And why, my Lady Wisdom? Hold your tongue,

Good Prudence. Smatter with your gossips, go!

Nurse. I speak no treason.

Cap. O, God-i-god-en!

Nurse. May not one speak?

Cap. Peace, you mumbling fool!

Utter your gravity o'er a gossip's bowl,

For here we need it not.

Lady Cap. You are too hot.

Cap. God's bread I it makes me mad. Day, night, late, early,

At home, abroad, alone, in company,

Waking or sleeping, still my care hath been

To have her match'd; and having now provided

A gentleman of princely parentage,

Of fair demesnes, youthful, and nobly train'd,

Stuff'd, as they say, with honourable parts,

Proportion'd as one's thought would wish a man-

And then to have a wretched puling fool,

A whining mammet, in her fortune's tender,

To answer 'I'll not wed, I cannot love;

I am too young, I pray you pardon me'!

But, an you will not wed, I'll pardon you.

Graze where you will, you shall not house with me.

Look to't, think on't; I do not use to jest.

Thursday is near; lay hand on heart, advise:

An you be mine, I'll give you to my friend;

An you be not, hang, beg, starve, die in the streets,

For, by my soul, I'll ne'er acknowledge thee,

Nor what is mine shall never do thee good.

Trust to't. Bethink you. I'll not be forsworn.

[Exit.]

Juliet. Is there no pity sitting in the clouds

That sees into the bottom of my grief?

O sweet my mother, cast me not away!

Delay this marriage for a month, a week;

Or if you do not, make the bridal bed

In that dim monument where Tybalt lies.

Lady Cap. Talk not to me, for I'll not speak a word.

Do as thou wilt, for I have done with thee. Exit.

Juliet. O God!- O nurse, how shall this be prevented?

My husband is on earth, my faith in heaven.

How shall that faith return again to earth

Unless that husband send it me from heaven

By leaving earth? Comfort me, counsel me.

Alack, alack, that heaven should practise stratagems

Upon so soft a subject as myself!

What say'st thou? Hast thou not a word of joy?

Some comfort, nurse.

Nurse. Faith, here it is.

Romeo is banish'd; and all the world to nothing

That he dares ne'er come back to challenge you;

Or if he do, it needs must be by stealth.

Then, since the case so stands as now it doth,

I think it best you married with the County.

O, he's a lovely gentleman!

Romeo's a dishclout to him. An eagle, madam,

Hath not so green, so quick, so fair an eye

As Paris hath. Beshrew my very heart,

I think you are happy in this second match,

For it excels your first; or if it did not,

Your first is dead- or 'twere as good he were

As living here and you no use of him.

Juliet. Speak'st thou this from thy heart?

Nurse. And from my soul too; else beshrew them both.

Juliet. Amen!

Nurse. What?

Juliet. Well, thou hast comforted me marvellous much.

Go in; and tell my lady I am gone,

Having displeas'd my father, to Laurence' cell,

To make confession and to be absolv'd.

Nurse. Marry, I will; and this is wisely done. Exit.

Juliet. Ancient damnation! O most wicked fiend!

Is it more sin to wish me thus forsworn,

Or to dispraise my lord with that same tongue

Which she hath prais'd him with above compare

So many thousand times? Go, counsellor!

Thou and my bosom henceforth shall be twain.

I'll to the friar to know his remedy.

If all else fail, myself have power to die.

[Exit.]

 

ACT IV.

SCENE I.

FRIAR LAURENCE'S cell.

 

Enter FRIAR [LAURENCE] and PARIS.

 

Friar L. On Thursday, sir? The time is very short.

Paris. My father Capulet will have it so,

And I am nothing slow to slack his haste.

Friar L. You say you do not know the lady's mind.

Uneven is the course; I like it not.

Paris. Immoderately she weeps for Tybalt's death,

And therefore have I little talk'd of love;

For Venus smiles not in a house of tears.

Now, sir, her father counts it dangerous

That she do give her sorrow so much sway,

And in his wisdom hastes our marriage

To stop the inundation of her tears,

Which, too much minded by herself alone,

May be put from her by society.

Now do you know the reason of this haste.

Friar L. [aside] I would I knew not why it should be slow'd.-

Look, sir, here comes the lady toward my cell.

 

Enter JULIET.

 

Paris. Happily met, my lady and my wife!

Juliet. That may be, sir, when I may be a wife.

Paris. That may be must be, love, on Thursday next.

Juliet. What must be shall be.

Friar L. That's a certain text.

Paris. Come you to make confession to this father?

Juliet. To answer that, I should confess to you.

Paris. Do not deny to him that you love me.

Juliet. I will confess to you that I love him.

Paris. So will ye, I am sure, that you love me.

Juliet. If I do so, it will be of more price,

Being spoke behind your back, than to your face.

Paris. Poor soul, thy face is much abus'd with tears.

Juliet. The tears have got small victory by that,

For it was bad enough before their spite.

Paris. Thou wrong'st it more than tears with that report.

Juliet. That is no slander, sir, which is a truth;

And what I spake, I spake it to my face.

Paris. Thy face is mine, and thou hast sland'red it.

Juliet. It may be so, for it is not mine own.

Are you at leisure, holy father, now,

Or shall I come to you at evening mass

Friar L. My leisure serves me, pensive daughter, now.

My lord, we must entreat the time alone.

Paris. God shield I should disturb devotion!

Juliet, on Thursday early will I rouse ye.

Till then, adieu, and keep this holy kiss. [Exit.]

 

Juliet. O, shut the door! and when thou hast done so,

Come weep with me- past hope, past cure, past help!

Friar L. Ah, Juliet, I already know thy grief;

It strains me past the compass of my wits.

I hear thou must, and nothing may prorogue it,

On Thursday next be married to this County.

Juliet. Tell me not, friar, that thou hear'st of this,

Unless thou tell me how I may prevent it.

If in thy wisdom thou canst give no help,

Do thou but call my resolution wise

And with this knife I'll help it presently.

God join'd my heart and Romeo's, thou our hands;

And ere this hand, by thee to Romeo's seal'd,

Shall be the label to another deed,

Or my true heart with treacherous revolt

Turn to another, this shall slay them both.

Therefore, out of thy long-experienc'd time,

Give me some present counsel; or, behold,

'Twixt my extremes and me this bloody knife

Shall play the empire, arbitrating that

Which the commission of thy years and art

Could to no issue of true honour bring.

Be not so long to speak. I long to die

If what thou speak'st speak not of remedy.

Friar L. Hold, daughter. I do spy a kind of hope,

Which craves as desperate an execution

As that is desperate which we would prevent.

If, rather than to marry County Paris

Thou hast the strength of will to slay thyself,

Then is it likely thou wilt undertake

A thing like death to chide away this shame,

That cop'st with death himself to scape from it;

And, if thou dar'st, I'll give thee remedy.

Juliet. O, bid me leap, rather than marry Paris,

From off the battlements of yonder tower,

Or walk in thievish ways, or bid me lurk

Where serpents are; chain me with roaring bears,

Or shut me nightly in a charnel house,

O'ercover'd quite with dead men's rattling bones,

With reeky shanks and yellow chapless skulls;

Or bid me go into a new-made grave

And hide me with a dead man in his shroud-

Things that, to hear them told, have made me tremble-

And I will do it without fear or doubt,

To live an unstain'd wife to my sweet love.

Friar L. Hold, then. Go home, be merry, give consent

To marry Paris. Wednesday is to-morrow.

Tomorrow night look that thou lie alone;

Let not the nurse lie with thee in thy chamber.

Take thou this vial, being then in bed,

And this distilled liquor drink thou off;

When presently through all thy veins shall run

A cold and drowsy humour; for no pulse

Shall keep his native progress, but surcease;

No warmth, no breath, shall testify thou livest;

The roses in thy lips and cheeks shall fade

To paly ashes, thy eyes' windows fall

Like death when he shuts up the day of life;

Each part, depriv'd of supple government,

Shall, stiff and stark and cold, appear like death;

And in this borrowed likeness of shrunk death

Thou shalt continue two-and-forty hours,

And then awake as from a pleasant sleep.

Now, when the bridegroom in the morning comes

To rouse thee from thy bed, there art thou dead.

Then, as the manner of our country is,

In thy best robes uncovered on the bier

Thou shalt be borne to that same ancient vault

Where all the kindred of the Capulets lie.

In the mean time, against thou shalt awake,

Shall Romeo by my letters know our drift;

And hither shall he come; and he and I

Will watch thy waking, and that very night

Shall Romeo bear thee hence to Mantua.

And this shall free thee from this present shame,

If no inconstant toy nor womanish fear

Abate thy valour in the acting it.

Juliet. Give me, give me! O, tell not me of fear!

Friar L. Hold! Get you gone, be strong and prosperous

In this resolve. I'll send a friar with speed

To Mantua, with my letters to thy lord.

Juliet. Love give me strength! and strength shall help afford.

Farewell, dear father.

[Exeunt.]

 

SCENE II.

CAPULET'S house.

 

Enter CAPULET, LADY CAPULET, NURSE, and two or three Servingmen.

 

Cap. So many guests invite as here are writ.

[Exit  Servingman.]

Sirrah, go hire me twenty cunning cooks.

Ser. You shall have none ill, sir; for I'll try if they can lick

their fingers.

Cap. How canst thou try them so?

Ser. Marry, sir, 'tis an ill cook that cannot lick his own

fingers. Therefore he that cannot lick his fingers goes not with

me.

Cap. Go, begone. [Exit Servingman.]

We shall be much unfurnish'd for this time.

What, is my daughter gone to Friar Laurence?

Nurse. Ay, forsooth.

Cap. Well, be may chance to do some good on her.

A peevish self-will'd harlotry it is.

 

Enter JULIET.

 

Nurse. See where she comes from shrift with merry look.

Cap. How now, my headstrong? Where have you been gadding?

Juliet. Where I have learnt me to repent the sin

Of disobedient opposition

To you and your behests, and am enjoin'd

By holy Laurence to fall prostrate here

To beg your pardon. Pardon, I beseech you!

Henceforward I am ever rul'd by you.

[She kneels down.]

Cap. Send for the County. Go tell him of this.

I'll have this knot knit up to-morrow morning.

Juliet. I met the youthful lord at Laurence' cell

And gave him what becomed love I might,

Not stepping o'er the bounds of modesty.

Cap. Why, I am glad on't. This is well. Stand up.

This is as't should be. Let me see the County.

Ay, marry, go, I say, and fetch him hither.

Now, afore God, this reverend holy friar,

All our whole city is much bound to him.

Juliet. Nurse, will you go with me into my closet

To help me sort such needful ornaments

As you think fit to furnish me tomorrow?

Lady Cap. No, not till Thursday. There is time enough.

Cap. Go, nurse, go with her. We'll to church tomorrow.

[Exeunt JULIET and NURSE.]

 

Lady Cap. We shall be short in our provision.

'Tis now near night.

Cap. Tush, I will stir about,

And all things shall be well, I warrant thee, wife.

Go thou to Juliet, help to deck up her.

I'll not to bed to-night; let me alone.

I'll play the housewife for this once. What, ho!

They are all forth; well, I will walk myself

To County Paris, to prepare him up

Against to-morrow. My heart is wondrous light,

Since this same wayward girl is so reclaim'd.

[Exeunt.]

 

SCENE III.

JULIET'S chamber.

 

Enter JULIET and NURSE.

 

Juliet. Ay, those attires are best; but, gentle nurse,

I pray thee leave me to myself to-night;

For I have need of many orisons

To move the heavens to smile upon my state,

Which, well thou knowest, is cross and full of sin.

 

Enter LADY CAPULET.

 

Lady Cap. What, are you busy, ho? Need you my help?

Juliet. No, madam; we have cull'd such necessaries

As are behooffull for our state to-morrow.

So please you, let me now be left alone,

And let the nurse this night sit up with you;

For I am sure you have your hands full all

In this so sudden business.

Lady Cap. Good night.

Get thee to bed, and rest; for thou hast need.

 

Exeunt [LADY CAPULETMother and NURSE.]

 

Juliet. Farewell! God knows when we shall meet again.

I have a faint cold fear thrills through my veins

That almost freezes up the heat of life.

I'll call them back again to comfort me.

Nurse!- What should she do here?

My dismal scene I needs must act alone.

Come, vial.

What if this mixture do not work at all?

Shall I be married then to-morrow morning?

No, No! This shall forbid it. Lie thou there.

[Lays down a knife.]

What if it be a poison which the friar

Subtilly hath minist'red to have me dead,

Lest in this marriage he should be dishonour'd

Because he married me before to Romeo?

I fear it is; and yet methinks it should not,

For he hath still been tried a holy man.

I will not entertain so bad a thought.

How if, when I am laid into the tomb,

I wake before the time that Romeo

Come to redeem me? There's a fearful point!

Shall I not then be stifled in the vault,

To whose foul mouth no healthsome air breathes in,

And there die strangled ere my Romeo comes?

Or, if I live, is it not very like

The horrible conceit of death and night,

Together with the terror of the place-

As in a vault, an ancient receptacle

Where for this many hundred years the bones

Of all my buried ancestors are pack'd;

Where bloody Tybalt, yet but green in earth,

Lies fest'ring in his shroud; where, as they say,

At some hours in the night spirits resort-

Alack, alack, is it not like that I,

So early waking- what with loathsome smells,

And shrieks like mandrakes torn out of the earth,

That living mortals, hearing them, run mad-

O, if I wake, shall I not be distraught,

Environed with all these hideous fears,

And madly play with my forefathers' joints,

And pluck the mangled Tybalt from his shroud.,

And, in this rage, with some great kinsman's bone

As with a club dash out my desp'rate brains?

O, look! methinks I see my cousin's ghost

Seeking out Romeo, that did spit his body

Upon a rapier's point. Stay, Tybalt, stay!

Romeo, I come! this do I drink to thee.

[She falls upon her bed within the curtains.]

 

SCENE IV.

CAPULET'S house.

 

Enter LADY CAPULET and NURSE.

 

Lady Cap. Hold, take these keys and fetch more spices, nurse.

Nurse. They call for dates and quinces in the pastry.

 

Enter CAPULET.

 

Cap. Come, stir, stir, stir! The second cock hath crow'd,

The curfew bell hath rung, 'tis three o'clock.

Look to the bak'd meats, good Angelica;

Spare not for cost.

Nurse. Go, you cot-quean, go,

Get you to bed! Faith, you'll be sick to-morrow

For this night's watching.

Cap. No, not a whit. What, I have watch'd ere now

All night for lesser cause, and ne'er been sick.

Lady Cap. Ay, you have been a mouse-hunt in your time;

But I will watch you from such watching now.

 

[Exeunt LADY CAPULET and NURSE.]

 

Cap. A jealous-hood, a jealous-hood!

[Enter three or four SERVINGMEN with spits and logs and baskets.]

 Now  fellow, what is there?

1 Ser. Things for the cook, sir; but I know not what.

Cap. Make haste, make haste. [Exit 1 Servingman.]

- Sirrah, fetch drier logs!

Call Peter; he will show thee where they are.

2 Ser. I have a head, sir, that will find out logs

And never trouble Peter for the matter.

Cap. Mass, and well said! A merry whoreson, ha.

Thou shalt be loggerhead! [Exit 2 Servingman.]

-Good faith! 'Tis day! [Play music.]

The County will be here with music straight,

For so he said he would. I hear him near.

Nurse! Wife! What, ho! What, Nurse, I say!

 

Enter NURSE.

 

Go waken Juliet; go and trim her up.

I'll go and chat with Paris. Hie, make haste,

Make haste! The bridegroom he is come already:

Make haste, I say.

[Exeunt CAPULET and SERVINGMEN.]

 

SCENE V.

JULIET'S chamber.

[NURSE goes to the curtains.]

 

Nurse. Mistress! what, mistress! Juliet! Fast, I warrant her, she.

Why, lamb! why, lady! Fie, you slug-abed!

Why, love, I say! madam! sweetheart! Why, bride!

What, not a word? You take your pennyworths now!

Sleep for a week; for the next night, I warrant,

The County Paris hath set up his rest

That you shall rest but little. God forgive me!

Marry, and amen. How sound is she asleep!

I needs must wake her. Madam, madam, madam!

Ay, let the County take you in your bed!

He'll fright you up, i' faith. Will it not be?

What, dress'd, and in your clothes, and down again?

I must needs wake you. Lady! lady! lady!

Alas, alas! Help, help! My lady's dead!

O weraday that ever I was born!

Some aqua-vitae, ho! My lord! my lady!

 

Enter LADY CAPULET.

 

Lady Cap. What noise is here?

Nurse. O lamentable day!

Lady Cap. What is the matter?

Nurse. Look, look! O heavy day!

Lady Cap. O me, O me! My child, my only life!

Revive, look up, or I will die with thee!

Help, help! Call help.

 

Enter CAPULET.

 

Cap. For shame, bring Juliet forth; her lord is come.

Nurse. She's dead, deceas'd; she's dead! Alack the day!

Lady Cap. Alack the day, she's dead, she's dead, she's dead!

Cap. Ha! let me see her. Out alas! she's cold,

Her blood is settled, and her joints are stiff;

Life and these lips have long been separated.

Death lies on her like an untimely frost

Upon the sweetest flower of all the field.

Nurse. O lamentable day!

Lady Cap. O woful time!

Cap. Death, that hath ta'en her hence to make me wail,

Ties up my tongue and will not let me speak.

 

Enter FRIAR [LAURENCE] and PARIS, with Musicians.

 

Friar L. Come, is the bride ready to go to church?

Cap. Ready to go, but never to return.

O son, the night before thy wedding day

Hath Death lain with thy wife. See, there she lies,

Flower as she was, deflowered by him.

Death is my son-in-law, Death is my heir;

My daughter he hath wedded. I will die

And leave him all. Life, living, all is Death's.

Paris. Have I thought long to see this morning's face,

And doth it give me such a sight as this?

Lady Cap. Accurs'd, unhappy, wretched, hateful day!

Most miserable hour that e'er time saw

In lasting labour of his pilgrimage!

But one, poor one, one poor and loving child,

But one thing to rejoice and solace in,

And cruel Death hath catch'd it from my sight!

Nurse. O woe? O woful, woful, woful day!

Most lamentable day, most woful day

That ever ever I did yet behold!

O day! O day! O day! O hateful day!

Never was seen so black a day as this.

O woful day! O woful day!

Paris. Beguil'd, divorced, wronged, spited, slain!

Most detestable Death, by thee beguil'd,

By cruel cruel thee quite overthrown!

O love! O life! not life, but love in death!

Cap. Despis'd, distressed, hated, martyr'd, kill'd!

Uncomfortable time, why cam'st thou now

To murther, murther our solemnity?

O child! O child! my soul, and not my child!

Dead art thou, dead! alack, my child is dead,

And with my child my joys are buried.

Friar L. Peace, ho, for shame! Confusion's cure lives not

In these confusions. Heaven and yourself

Had part in this fair maid! now heaven hath all,

And all the better is it for the maid.

Your part in her you could not keep from death,

But heaven keeps his part in eternal life.

The most you sought was her promotion,

For 'twas your heaven she should be advanc'd;

And weep ye now, seeing she is advanc'd

Above the clouds, as high as heaven itself?

O, in this love, you love your child so ill

That you run mad, seeing that she is well.

She's not well married that lives married long,

But she's best married that dies married young.

Dry up your tears and stick your rosemary

On this fair corse, and, as the custom is,

In all her best array bear her to church;

For though fond nature bids us all lament,

Yet nature's tears are reason's merriment.

Cap. All things that we ordained festival

Turn from their office to black funeral-

Our instruments to melancholy bells,

Our wedding cheer to a sad burial feast;

Our solemn hymns to sullen dirges change;

Our bridal flowers serve for a buried corse;

And all things change them to the contrary.

Friar L. Sir, go you in; and, madam, go with him;

And go, Sir Paris. Every one prepare

To follow this fair corse unto her grave.

The heavens do low'r upon you for some ill;

Move them no more by crossing their high will.

 

[Exeunt all but the NURSE and Musicians, casting rosemary

 on Juliet and shutting the curtains.]

 

1. Mus. Faith, we may put up our pipes and be gone.

Nurse. Honest good fellows, ah, put up, put up!

For well you know this is a pitiful case. [Exit.]

1 Mus. Ay, by my troth, the case may be amended.

[Exit NURSE.]

 

Enter PETER.

 

Peter. Musicians, O, musicians, 'Heart's ease,' 'Heart's ease'!

O, an you will have me live, play 'Heart's ease.'

1. Mus. Why 'Heart's ease'',

Peter. O, musicians, because my heart itself plays 'My heart is full

of woe.' O, play me some merry dump to comfort me.

1. Mus. Not a dump we! 'Tis no time to play now.

Pet. You will not then?

1. Mus. No.

Peter. I will then give it you soundly.

1. Mus. What will you give us?

Peter. No money, on my faith, but the gleek. I will give you the

minstrel.

1. Mus. Then will I give you the serving-creature.

Peter. Then will I lay the serving-creature's dagger on your pate.

I will carry no crotchets. I'll re you, I'll fa you. Do you note

me?

1. Mus. An you re us and fa us, you note us.

2. Mus. Pray you put up your dagger, and put out your wit.

Peter. Then have at you with my wit! I will dry-beat you with an iron

wit, and put up my iron dagger. Answer me like men.

'When griping grief the heart doth wound,

And doleful dumps the mind oppress,

Then music with her silver sound'-

Why 'silver sound'? Why 'music with her silver sound'?

What say you, Simon Catling?

1. Mus. Marry, sir, because silver hath a sweet sound.

Pet. Pretty! What say You, Hugh Rebeck?

2. Mus. I say 'silver sound' because musicians sound for silver.

Pet. Pretty too! What say you, James Soundpost?

3. Mus. Faith, I know not what to say.

Peter. O, I cry you mercy! you are the singer. I will say  for you. It

is 'music with her silver sound' because musicians have no gold

for sounding.

'Then music with her silver sound

With speedy help doth lend redress.' [Exit.]

1. Mus. What a pestilent knave is this same?

2. Mus. Hang him, Jack! Come, we'll in here, tarry for the

mourners, and stay dinner.

[Exeunt.]

 

ACT V.

SCENE I.

Mantua. A street.

 

Enter ROMEO.

 

Romeo. If I may trust the flattering truth of sleep

My dreams presage some joyful news at hand.

My bosom's lord sits lightly in his throne,

And all this day an unaccustom'd spirit

Lifts me above the ground with cheerful thoughts.

I dreamt my lady came and found me dead

(Strange dream that gives a dead man leave to think!)

And breath'd such life with kisses in my lips

That I reviv'd and was an emperor.

Ah me! how sweet is love itself possess'd,

When but love's shadows are so rich in joy.

 

Enter BALTHASAR, Romeo's man, booted.

 

News from Verona! How now, Balthasar?

Dost thou not bring me letters from the friar?

How doth my lady? Is my father well?

How fares my Juliet? That I ask again,

For nothing can be ill if she be well.

 

Bal. Then she is well, and nothing can be ill.

Her body sleeps in Capel's monument,

And her immortal part with angels lives.

I saw her laid low in her kindred's vault

And presently took post to tell it you.

O, pardon me for bringing these ill news,

Since you did leave it for my office, sir.

Romeo. Is it e'en so? Then I defy you, stars!

Thou knowest my lodging. Get me ink and paper

And hire posthorses. I will hence to-night.

Bal. I do beseech you, sir, have patience.

Your looks are pale and wild and do import

Some misadventure.

Romeo. Tush, thou art deceiv'd.

Leave me and do the thing I bid thee do.

Hast thou no letters to me from the friar?

Bal. No, my good lord.

Romeo. No matter. Get thee gone

And hire those horses. I'll be with thee straight.

[Exit BALTHASAR].

Well, Juliet, I will lie with thee to-night.

Let's see for means. O mischief, thou art swift

To enter in the thoughts of desperate men!

I do remember an apothecary,

And hereabouts 'a dwells, which late I noted

In tatt'red weeds, with overwhelming brows,

Culling of simples. Meagre were his looks,

Sharp misery had worn him to the bones;

And in his needy shop a tortoise hung,

An alligator stuff'd, and other skins

Of ill-shaped fishes; and about his shelves

A beggarly account of empty boxes,

Green earthen pots, bladders, and musty seeds,

Remnants of packthread, and old cakes of roses

Were thinly scattered, to make up a show.

Noting this penury, to myself I said,

'An if a man did need a poison now

Whose sale is present death in Mantua,

Here lives a caitiff wretch would sell it him.'

O, this same thought did but forerun my need,

And this same needy man must sell it me.

As I remember, this should be the house.

Being holiday, the beggar's shop is shut. What, ho! apothecary!

 

Enter APOTHECARY.

 

Apoth. Who calls so loud?

Romeo. Come hither, man. I see that thou art poor.

Hold, there is forty ducats. Let me have

A dram of poison, such soon-speeding gear

As will disperse itself through all the veins

That the life-weary taker mall fall dead,

And that the trunk may be discharg'd of breath

As violently as hasty powder fir'd

Doth hurry from the fatal cannon's womb.

Apoth. Such mortal drugs I have; but Mantua's law

Is death to any he that utters them.

Romeo. Art thou so bare and full of wretchedness

And fearest to die? Famine is in thy cheeks,

Need and oppression starveth in thine eyes,

Contempt and beggary hangs upon thy back:

The world is not thy friend, nor the world's law;

The world affords no law to make thee rich;

Then be not poor, but break it and take this.

Apoth. My poverty but not my will consents.

Romeo. I pay thy poverty and not thy will.

Apoth. Put this in any liquid thing you will

And drink it off, and if you had the strength

Of twenty men, it would dispatch you straight.

Romeo. There is thy gold- worse poison to men's souls,

Doing more murther in this loathsome world,

Than these poor compounds that thou mayst not sell.

I sell thee poison; thou hast sold me none.

Farewell. Buy food and get thyself in flesh.

Come, cordial and not poison, go with me

To Juliet's grave; for there must I use thee.

[Exeunt.]

 

SCENE II.

Verona. FRIAR LAURENCE'S cell.

 

Enter FRIAR JOHN.

 

Friar J. Holy Franciscan Friar, Brother, ho!

 

Enter FRIAR LAURENCE.

 

Friar L. This same should be the voice of Friar John.

Welcome from Mantua. What says Romeo?

Or, if his mind be writ, give me his letter.

Friar J. Going to find a barefoot brother out,

One of our order, to associate me

Here in this city visiting the sick,

And finding him, the searchers of the town,

Suspecting that we both were in a house

Where the infectious pestilence did reign,

Seal'd up the doors, and would not let us forth,

So that my speed to Mantua there was stay'd.

Friar L. Who bare my letter, then, to Romeo?

Friar J. I could not send it- here it is again-

Nor get a messenger to bring it thee,

So fearful were they of infection.

Friar L. Unhappy fortune! By my brotherhood,

The letter was not nice, but full of charge,

Of dear import; and the neglecting it

May do much danger. Friar John, go hence,

Get me an iron crow and bring it straight

Unto my cell.

Friar J. Brother, I'll go and bring it thee. [Exit.]

Friar L. Now, must I to the monument alone.

Within this three hours will fair Juliet wake.

She will beshrew me much that Romeo

Hath had no notice of these accidents;

But I will write again to Mantua,

And keep her at my cell till Romeo come-

Poor living corse, clos'd in a dead man's tomb!

[Exit.]

 

SCENE III.

Verona. A churchyard; in it the monument of the CAPULETS.

 

Enter PARIS and his PAGE, with flowers and sweet water.

 

Paris. Give me thy torch, boy. Hence, and stand aloof.

Yet put it out, for I would not be seen.

Under yond yew tree lay thee all along,

Holding thine ear close to the hollow ground.

So shall no foot upon the churchyard tread

(Being loose, unfirm, with digging up of graves)

But thou shalt hear it. Whistle then to me,

As signal that thou hear'st something approach.

Give me those flowers. Do as I bid thee, go.

Page. [aside] I am almost afraid to stand alone

Here in the churchyard; yet I will adventure. [Retires.]

[PARIS strews the tomb with flowers.]

Paris. Sweet flower, with flowers thy bridal bed I strew.

O woe, thy canopy is dust and stones

Which with sweet water nightly I will dew,

Or, wanting that, with tears distill'd by moans.

The obsequies that I for thee will keep

Nightly shall be to strew, thy grave and weep.

[PAGE whistes.]

The boy gives warning something doth approach.

What cursed foot wanders this way to-night

To cross my obsequies and true love's rite?

What, with a torch? Muffle me, night, awhile.

[PARIS retires.]

 

Enter ROMEO, and BALTHASAR with a torch, a mattock

and a crow of iron.

 

Romeo. Give me that mattock and the wrenching iron.

Hold, take this letter. Early in the morning

See thou deliver it to my lord and father.

Give me the light. Upon thy life I charge thee,

Whate'er thou hearest or seest, stand all aloof

And do not interrupt me in my course.

Why I descend into this bed of death

Is partly to behold my lady's face,

But chiefly to take thence from her dead finger

A precious ring- a ring that I must use

In dear employment. Therefore hence, be gone.

But if thou, jealous, dost return to pry

In what I farther shall intend to do,

By heaven, I will tear thee joint by joint

And strew this hungry churchyard with thy limbs.

The time and my intents are savage-wild,

More fierce and more inexorable far

Than empty tigers or the roaring sea.

Bal. I will be gone, sir, and not trouble you.

Romeo. So shalt thou show me friendship. Take thou that.

Live, and be prosperous; and farewell, good fellow.

Bal. [aside] For all this same, I'll hide me hereabout.

His looks I fear, and his intents I doubt. [Retires.]

Romeo. Thou detestable maw, thou womb of death,

Gorg'd with the dearest morsel of the earth,

Thus I enforce thy rotten jaws to open,

And in despite I'll cram thee with more food.

Romeo opens the tomb.

Paris. This is that banish'd haughty Montague

That murd'red my love's cousin- with which grief

It is supposed the fair creature died-

And here is come to do some villanous shame

To the dead bodies. I will apprehend him.

Stop thy unhallowed toil, vile Montague!

Can vengeance be pursu'd further than death?

Condemned villain, I do apprehend thee.

Obey, and go with me; for thou must die.

Romeo. I must indeed; and therefore came I hither.

Good gentle youth, tempt not a desp'rate man.

Fly hence and leave me. Think upon these gone;

Let them affright thee. I beseech thee, youth,

But not another sin upon my head

By urging me to fury. O, be gone!

By heaven, I love thee better than myself,

For I come hither arm'd against myself.

Stay not, be gone. Live, and hereafter say

A madman's mercy bid thee run away.

Paris. I do defy thy, conjuration

And apprehend thee for a felon here.

Romeo. Wilt thou provoke me? Then have at thee, boy!

[They fight.]

Page. O Lord, they fight! I will go call the Watch.

[Exit PAGE]

Paris. O, I am slain! If thou be merciful,

Open the tomb, lay me with Juliet. [PARIS dies.]

Romeo. In faith, I will. Let me peruse this face.

Mercutio's kinsman, noble County Paris!

What said my man when my betossed soul

Did not attend him as we rode? I think

He told me Paris should have married Juliet.

Said he not so? or did I dream it so?

Or am I mad, hearing him talk of Juliet

To think it was so? O, give me thy hand,

One writ with me in sour misfortune's book!

I'll bury thee in a triumphant grave.

A grave? O, no, a lanthorn, slaught'red youth,

For here lies Juliet, and her beauty makes

This vault a feasting presence full of light.

Death, lie thou there, by a dead man interr'd.

[Lays him in the tomb.]

How oft when men are at the point of death

Have they been merry! which their keepers call

A lightning before death. O, how may I

Call this a lightning? O my love! my wife!

Death, that hath suck'd the honey of thy breath,

Hath had no power yet upon thy beauty.

Thou art not conquer'd. Beauty's ensign yet

Is crimson in thy lips and in thy cheeks,

And death's pale flag is not advanced there.

Tybalt, liest thou there in thy bloody sheet?

O, what more favour can I do to thee

Than with that hand that cut thy youth in twain

To sunder his that was thine enemy?

Forgive me, cousin.' Ah, dear Juliet,

Why art thou yet so fair? Shall I believe

That unsubstantial Death is amorous,

And that the lean abhorred monster keeps

Thee here in dark to be his paramour?

For fear of that I still will stay with thee

And never from this palace of dim night

Depart again. Here, here will I remain

With worms that are thy chambermaids. O, here

Will I set up my everlasting rest

And shake the yoke of inauspicious stars

From this world-wearied flesh. Eyes, look your last!

Arms, take your last embrace! and, lips, O you

The doors of breath, seal with a righteous kiss

A dateless bargain to engrossing death!

Come, bitter conduct; come, unsavoury guide!

Thou desperate pilot, now at once run on

The dashing rocks thy seasick weary bark!

Here's to my love! [He drinks.] O true apothecary!

Thy drugs are quick. Thus with a kiss I die. [He falls.]

 

Enter FRIAR [LAURENCE], with lantern, crow and spade.

 

Friar L. Saint Francis be my speed! how oft to-night

Have my old feet stumbled at graves! Who's there?

Bal. Here's one, a friend, and one that knows you well.

Friar L. Bliss be upon you! Tell me, good my friend,

What torch is yond that vainly lends his light

To grubs and eyeless skulls? As I discern,

It burneth in the Capels' monument.

Bal. It doth so, holy sir; and there's my master,

One that you love.

Friar L. Who is it?

Bal. Romeo.

Friar L. How long hath he been there?

Bal. Full half an hour.

Friar L. Go with me to the vault.

Bal. I dare not, sir.

My master knows not but I am gone hence,

And fearfully did menace me with death

If I did stay to look on his intents.

Friar L. Stay then; I'll go alone. Fear comes upon me.

O, much I fear some ill unthrifty thing.

Bal. As I did sleep under this yew tree here,

I dreamt my master and another fought,

And that my master slew him.

Friar L. Romeo!

[FRIAR stoops and looks on the blood and weapons.]

Alack, alack, what blood is this which stains

The stony entrance of this sepulchre?

What mean these masterless and gory swords

To lie discolour'd by this place of peace?

Romeo! O, pale! Who else? What, Paris too?

And steep'd in blood? Ah, what an unkind hour

Is guilty of this lamentable chance? The lady stirs.

 

JULIET rises.

 

Juliet. O comfortable Friar! where is my lord?

I do remember well where I should be,

And there I am. Where is my Romeo?

Friar L. I hear some noise. Lady, come from that nest

Of death, contagion, and unnatural sleep.

A greater power than we can contradict

Hath thwarted our intents. Come, come away.

Thy husband in thy bosom there lies dead;

And Paris too. Come, I'll dispose of thee

Among a sisterhood of holy nuns.

Stay not to question, for the Watch is coming.

Come, go, good Juliet. I dare no longer stay.

Juliet. Go, get thee hence, for I will not away.

[Exit FRIAR LAURENCE].

What's here? A cup, clos'd in my true love's hand?

Poison, I see, hath been his timeless end.

O churl! drunk all, and left no friendly drop

To help me after? I will kiss thy lips.

Haply some poison yet doth hang on them

To make me die with a restorative. [She kisses him.]

Thy lips are warm!

Watchman. [within.] Lead, boy. Which way?

Juliet. Yea, noise? Then I'll be brief. O happy dagger!

[Snatching ROMEO'S dagger.]

This is thy sheath; there rust, and let me die.

[She stabs herself and falls].

 

Enter [PARIS'S] PAGE and Watchmen.

 

Page. This is the place. There, where the torch doth burn.

1 Watchman. 'the ground is bloody. Search about the churchyard.

Go, some of you; whoe'er you find attach.

[Exeunt some Watchmen.]

Pitiful sight! here lies the County slain;

And Juliet bleeding, warm, and newly dead,

Who here hath lain this two days buried.

Go, tell the Prince; run to the Capulets;

Raise up the Montagues. Some others search.

[Exeunt some Watchmen.]

We see the ground whereon these woes do lie,

But the true ground of all these piteous woes

We cannot without circumstance descry.

 

Enter [several Watchmen with] BALTHASAR.

 

2. Watchman. Here's Romeo's man. We found him in the churchyard.

1. Watchman. Hold him in safety till the Prince come hither.

 

Enter another Whatchman with FRIAR LAURENCE.

 

3. Watchman. Here is a friar that trembles, sighs, and weeps.

We took this mattock and this spade from him

As he was coming from this churchyard side.

1. Watchman. A great suspicion! Stay the friar too.

 

Enter the PRINCE [and ATTENDANTS].

 

Prince. What misadventure is so early up,

That calls our person from our morning rest?

 

Enter CAPULET and LADY CAPULET [and SERVANT].

 

Cap. What should it be, that they so shriek abroad?

Lady Cap. The people in the street cry 'Romeo,'

Some 'Juliet,' and some 'Paris'; and all run,

With open outcry, toward our monument.

Prince. What fear is this which startles in our ears?

1. Watchman. Sovereign, here lies the County Paris slain;

And Romeo dead; and Juliet, dead before,

Warm and new kill'd.

Prince. Search, seek, and know how this foul murder comes.

1. Watchman. Here is a friar, and slaughter'd Romeo's man,

With instruments upon them fit to open

These dead men's tombs.

Cap. O heavens! O wife, look how our daughter bleeds!

This dagger hath mista'en, for, lo, his house

Is empty on the back of Montague,

And it missheathed in my daughter's bosom.

Lady Cap. O me! this sight of death is as a bell

That warns my old age to a sepulchre.

 

Enter MONTAGUE [and SERVANTS].

 

Prince. Come, Montague; for thou art early up

To see thy son and heir more early down.

Mont. Alas, my liege, my wife is dead tonight!

Grief of my son's exile hath stopp'd her breath.

What further woe conspires against mine age?

Prince. Look, and thou shalt see.

Mont. O thou untaught! what manners is in this,

To press before thy father to a grave?

Prince. Seal up the mouth of outrage for a while,

Till we can clear these ambiguities

And know their spring, their head, their true descent;

And then will I be general of your woes

And lead you even to death. Meantime forbear,

And let mischance be slave to patience.

Bring forth the parties of suspicion.

Friar L. I am the greatest, able to do least,

Yet most suspected, as the time and place

Doth make against me, of this direful murther;

And here I stand, both to impeach and purge

Myself condemned and myself excus'd.

Prince. Then say it once what thou dost know in this.

Friar L. I will be brief, for my short date of breath

Is not so long as is a tedious tale.

Romeo, there dead, was husband to that Juliet;

And she, there dead, that Romeo's faithful wife.

I married them; and their stol'n marriage day

Was Tybalt's doomsday, whose untimely death

Banish'd the new-made bridegroom from this city;

For whom, and not for Tybalt, Juliet pin'd.

You, to remove that siege of grief from her,

Betroth'd and would have married her perforce

To County Paris. Then comes she to me

And with wild looks bid me devise some mean

To rid her from this second marriage,

Or in my cell there would she kill herself.

Then gave I her - so tutored by my art -

A sleeping potion, which so took effect

As I intended, for it wrought on her

The form of death. Meantime I writ to Romeo

That he should hither come as this dire night

To help to take her from her borrowed grave,

Being the time the potion's force should cease.

But he which bore my letter, Friar John,

Was stay'd by accident, and yesternight

Return'd my letter back. Then all alone

At the prefixed hour of her waking

Came I to take her from her kindred's vault;

Meaning to keep her closely at my cell

Till I conveniently could send to Romeo.

But when I came, some minute ere the time

Of her awaking, here untimely lay

The noble Paris and true Romeo dead.

She wakes; and I entreated her come forth

And bear this work of heaven with patience;

But then a noise did scare me from the tomb,

And she, too desperate, would not go with me,

But, as it seems, did violence on herself.

All this I know; and to the marriage

Her Nurse is privy; and if aught in this

Miscarried by my fault, let my old life

Be sacrific'd, some hour before his time,

Unto the rigour of severest law.

Prince. We still have known thee for a holy man.

Where's Romeo's man? What can he say in this?

Bal. I brought my master news of Juliet's death;

And then in post he came from Mantua

To this same place, to this same monument.

This letter he early bid me give his father,

And threat'ned me with death, going in the vault,

If I departed not and left him there.

Prince. Give me the letter. I will look on it.

Where is the County's page that rais'd the watch?

Sirrah, what made your master in this place?

Page. He came with flowers to strew his lady's grave;

And bid me stand aloof, and so I did.

Anon comes one with light to ope the tomb;

And by and by my master drew on him,

And then I ran away to call the Watch.

Prince. This letter doth make good the Friar's words,

Their course of love, the tidings of her death;

And here he writes that he did buy a poison

Of a poor pothecary, and therewithal

Came to this vault to die, and lie with Juliet.

Where be these enemies? Capulet, Montage,

See what a scourge is laid upon your hate,

That heaven finds means to kill your joys with love!

And I, for winking at you, discords too,

Have lost a brace of kinsmen. All are punish'd.

Cap. O brother Montague, give me thy hand.

This is my daughter's jointure, for no more

Can I demand.

Mont. But I can give thee more;

For I will raise her Statue in pure gold,

That whiles Verona by that name is known,

There shall no figure at such rate be set

As that of true and faithful Juliet.

Cap. As rich shall Romeo's by his lady's lie-

Poor sacrifices of our enmity!

Prince. A glooming peace this morning with it brings.

The sun for sorrow will not show his head.

Go hence, to have more talk of these sad things;

Some shall be pardon'd, and some punished;

For never was a story of more woe

Than this of Juliet and her Romeo.

[Exeunt.]

 

THE END
 this of Juliet and her Romeo.

[Exeunt.]

 

THE END
.

1 Watchman. 'the ground is bloody. Search about the churchyard.

Go, some of you; whoe'er you find attach.

[Exeunt some Watchmen.]

Pitiful sight! here lies the County slain;

And Juliet bleeding, warm, and newly dead,

Who here hath lain this two days buried.

Go, tell the Prince; run to the Capulets;

Raise up the Montagues. Some others search.

[Exeunt some Watchmen.]

We see the ground whereon these woes do lie,

But the true ground of all these piteous woes

We cannot without circumstance descry.

 

Enter [several Watchmen with] BALTHASAR.

 

2. Watchman. Here's Romeo's man. We found him in the churchyard.

1. Watchman. Hold him in safety till the Prince come hither.

 

Enter another Whatchman with FRIAR LAURENCE.

 

3. Watchman. Here is a friar that trembles, sighs, and weeps.

We took this mattock and this spade from him

As he was coming from this churchyard side.

1. Watchman. A great suspicion! Stay the friar too.

 

Enter the PRINCE [and ATTENDANTS].

 

Prince. What misadventure is so early up,

That calls our person from our morning rest?

 

Enter CAPULET and LADY CAPULET [and SERVANT].

 

Cap. What should it be, that they so shriek abroad?

Lady Cap. The people in the street cry 'Romeo,'

Some 'Juliet,' and some 'Paris'; and all run,

With open outcry, toward our monument.

Prince. What fear is this which startles in our ears?

1. Watchman. Sovereign, here lies the County Paris slain;

And Romeo dead; and Juliet, dead before,

Warm and new kill'd.

Prince. Search, seek, and know how this foul murder comes.

1. Watchman. Here is a friar, and slaughter'd Romeo's man,

With instruments upon them fit to open

These dead men's tombs.

Cap. O heavens! O wife, look how our daughter bleeds!

This dagger hath mista'en, for, lo, his house

Is empty on the back of Montague,

And it missheathed in my daughter's bosom.

Lady Cap. O me! this sight of death is as a bell

That warns my old age to a sepulchre.

 

Enter MONTAGUE [and SERVANTS].

 

Prince. Come, Montague; for thou art early up

To see thy son and heir more early down.

Mont. Alas, my liege, my wife is dead tonight!

Grief of my son's exile hath stopp'd her breath.

What further woe conspires against mine age?

Prince. Look, and thou shalt see.

Mont. O thou untaught! what manners is in this,

To press before thy father to a grave?

Prince. Seal up the mouth of outrage for a while,

Till we can clear these ambiguities

And know their spring, their head, their true descent;

And then will I be general of your woes

And lead you even to death. Meantime forbear,

And let mischance be slave to patience.

Bring forth the parties of suspicion.

Friar L. I am the greatest, able to do least,

Yet most suspected, as the time and place

Doth make against me, of this direful murther;

And here I stand, both to impeach and purge

Myself condemned and myself excus'd.

Prince. Then say it once what thou dost know in this.

Friar L. I will be brief, for my short date of breath

Is not so long as is a tedious tale.

Romeo, there dead, was husband to that Juliet;

And she, there dead, that Romeo's faithful wife.

I married them; and their stol'n marriage day

Was Tybalt's doomsday, whose untimely death

Banish'd the new-made bridegroom from this city;

For whom, and not for Tybalt, Juliet pin'd.

You, to remove that siege of grief from her,

Betroth'd and would have married her perforce

To County Paris. Then comes she to me

And with wild looks bid me devise some mean

To rid her from this second marriage,

Or in my cell there would she kill herself.

Then gave I her - so tutored by my art -

A sleeping potion, which so took effect

As I intended, for it wrought on her

The form of death. Meantime I writ to Romeo

That he should hither come as this dire night

To help to take her from her borrowed grave,

Being the time the potion's force should cease.

But he which bore my letter, Friar John,

Was stay'd by accident, and yesternight

Return'd my letter back. Then all alone

At the prefixed hour of her waking

Came I to take her from her kindred's vault;

Meaning to keep her closely at my cell

Till I conveniently could send to Romeo.

But when I came, some minute ere the time

Of her awaking, here untimely lay

The noble Paris and true Romeo dead.

She wakes; and I entreated her come forth

And bear this work of heaven with patience;

But then a noise did scare me from the tomb,

And she, too desperate, would not go with me,

But, as it seems, did violence on herself.

All this I know; and to the marriage

Her Nurse is privy; and if aught in this

Miscarried by my fault, let my old life

Be sacrific'd, some hour before his time,

Unto the rigour of severest law.

Prince. We still have known thee for a holy man.

Where's Romeo's man? What can he say in this?

Bal. I brought my master news of Juliet's death;

And then in post he came from Mantua

To this same place, to this same monument.

This letter he early bid me give his father,

And threat'ned me with death, going in the vault,

If I departed not and left him there.

Prince. Give me the letter. I will look on it.

Where is the County's page that rais'd the watch?

Sirrah, what made your master in this place?

Page. He came with flowers to strew his lady's grave;

And bid me stand aloof, and so I did.

Anon comes one with light to ope the tomb;
